Introduction

Role of the WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
The first volume of the WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, containing
28 monographs, was published in 1999. It is gratifying that the importance of
the monographs is already being recognized. For example, the European Commission has recommended volume 1 to its Member States as an authoritative
reference on the quality, safety and efficacy of medicinal plants. The Canadian
Government has also made a similar recommendation. Furthermore, as hoped,
some of WHO’s Member States, such as Benin, Mexico, South Africa and Viet
Nam, have developed their own monographs based on the format of the WHO
monographs.
The monographs are not only a valuable scientific reference for health
authorities, scientists and pharmacists, but will also be of interest to the general
public. There can be little doubt that the WHO monographs will continue to
play an important role in promoting the proper use of medicinal plants throughout the world.

Preparation of monographs for volume 2
At the eighth International Conference on Drug Regulatory Authorities
(ICDRA) held in Manama, Bahrain, in 1996, WHO reported the completion of
volume 1 of the WHO monographs. Member States requested WHO to continue to develop additional monographs. As a consequence, preparation of the
second volume began in 1997.
During the preparation, the number of experts involved, in addition to
members of WHO’s Expert Advisory Panel on Traditional Medicine, significantly increased compared to that for volume 1. Similarly, the number
of national drug regulatory authorities who participated in the preparation
also greatly increased. This global network of active collaborators facilitated
wider access to the scientific references and information, thus increasing both
the quality and quantity of the monographs. These combined efforts greatly
improved the efficiency of the preparation. As for volume 1, the monographs
were drafted by the WHO Collaborating Centre for Traditional Medicine at the
University of Illinois at Chicago, United States of America.
The Second WHO Consultation on Selected Medicinal Plants was held in
Ravello-Salerno, Italy, in March 1999 to review and finalize the draft monographs. Twenty experts and drug regulatory authorities from WHO Member
1

Introduction
States participated (see Annex 1). Following extensive discussion, 30 of 31 draft
monographs were approved for volume 2. At the subsequent ninth ICDRA in
Berlin, Germany in April 1999, the 30 draft monographs were presented, and
Member States requested WHO to publish them as soon as possible.

Purpose and content of the monographs
The purpose of the monographs was clearly explained in the introduction to
volume 1, and it is unnecessary to repeat it here. However, it is important to
emphasize that the word “monograph”, as appears in the title, is used as a technical term only. These monographs are not intended to be official pharmacopoeial monographs.
It should also be stressed that this publication is not intended to replace official compendia such as pharmacopoeias, formularies or legislative documents.
Furthermore, the descriptions included in the section on medicinal uses should
not be taken as implying WHO’s official endorsement or approval. They merely
represent the systematic collection of scientific information available at the time
of preparation, for the purpose of facilitating information exchange.
A description of selected sections of the monographs is given in the General
technical notices. For easy reference, two cumulative indexes are also provided
as annexes. Annex 2 lists the monographs in alphabetical order of the plant
name, while Annex 3 is according to the plant material of interest.
Dr Xiaorui Zhang
Acting Coordinator
Traditional Medicine
Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines Policy
World Health Organization

2

General technical notices

These WHO monographs are not pharmacopoeial monographs. Their purpose is to provide scientific information on the safety, efficacy and quality
control/quality assurance of widely used medicinal plants, in order to facilitate
their appropriate use in WHO’s Member States; to provide models to assist
WHO’s Member States in developing their own monographs or formularies for
these and other herbal medicines; and to facilitate information exchange among
WHO’s Member States.
The format used for volume 2 essentially follows that of volume 1.
However, to keep relevant sections together, Geographical distribution now precedes Description; and Dosage forms appears before Posology.
The Definition describes the identity of the plant material of interest and the
Latin binomial name of the source plant, the binomial name being the most
important criterion in quality assurance of the crude drug. Latin pharmacopoeial synonyms and vernacular names, listed in the sections Synonyms and
Selected vernacular names, respectively, are those names used in commerce or by
local consumers. The monographs place outdated botanical nomenclature in
the synonyms category, based on the International rules of nomenclature.
The vernacular names listed are a selection of names from individual countries worldwide, in particular from areas where the medicinal plant is in
common use. The lists are not complete, but reflect the names found at the
time of preparation in official monographs, reference books and the Natural
Products Alert (NAPRALERT) database (a database of literature from around
the world on ethnomedical, biological and chemical information on medicinal
plants, fungi and marine organisms, located at the WHO Collaborating Centre
for Traditional Medicine at the University of Illinois at Chicago, USA).
A detailed botanical description (in Description) is intended for quality assurance at the stages of production and collection of the source plant, whereas the
detailed description of the specific plant part used (the crude drug)—in Plant
material of interest—is for quality assurance at the manufacturing and commercial stages. Geographical distribution is not normally found in official compendia,
but it is included here to provide additional quality assurance information.
General identity tests, Purity tests and Chemical assays are all normal compendial components included under those headings in these monographs. Where
purity tests do not specify accepted limits, those limits should be set in accordance with requirements of the respective national health authorities.
Each medicinal plant and crude drug contains active or major chemical constituents with a characteristic profile that can be used for chemical quality
3

General technical notices
control and quality assurance. These constituents are described in the section
Major chemical constituents.
Descriptions included in the section on Medicinal uses should not be taken
as implying WHO’s official endorsement or approval. They merely represent
the systematic collection of scientific information available at the time of preparation, for information exchange. Medicinal uses are categorized as uses supported by clinical data; uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional
systems of medicine; and uses described in folk medicine, not yet supported
by experimental or clinical data.
The first category includes medicinal indications that are well established
in some countries and have been validated by clinical studies documented in
the scientific literature. The clinical trials may have been controlled, randomized, double-blind studies, trials without controls, cohort studies, or welldocumented observations of therapeutic applications.
The second category includes medicinal uses that are well established in
many countries and are included in official pharmacopoeias or national monographs. Well-established uses having a plausible pharmacological basis and supported by older studies that clearly need to be repeated are also included. The
references cited provide additional information useful in evaluating specific
herbal preparations. The uses described should be reviewed by local experts
and health workers for their applicability in the local situation.
The third category refers to indications described in unofficial pharmacopoeias and other literature, and to traditional uses. The appropriateness of
these uses could not be assessed, owing to a lack of scientific data to support
the claims. The possible uses of these remedies must be carefully considered
in the light of therapeutic alternatives.
The Experimental pharmacology section includes only the results of investigations that prove or disprove the cited medicinal uses. Abbreviated details of the
best-performed studies have been included in this section. Other published
experimental data that are not associated with the medicinal uses have not been
included to avoid confusion.
The details included in the section on References have been checked against
the original sources wherever possible. However, in some cases, details are
missing as the original sources were not available. For non-English language references, the title is given in the original language, except in cases where an
English summary is available.

4

Radix Althaeae

Definition
Radix Althaeae consists of the dried roots of Althaea officinalis L. (Malvaceae)
(1–4).

Synonym
Malva officinalis L. (5).

Selected vernacular names
Altea, altee, althea, bardul khatmi, benefischi, bismalva-hibiscus, blanca
malva, bon visclo, bourdon de St Jacques, Eibisch, Eibischwurzel, erva molle,
guimauve, Heilwurz, hobbiza, Ibischwurz, khairi, khatmi, korzén prawóslazu, marshmallow, marshmallow root, malvaccioniu, malvavisco, marmolone, molotta, Moorish mallow, orvosiziliz gyökér, racine d’althée, racine de
guimauve, Sammetpappel, sauvage, Schleimwurzel, suzmool, sweet weed,
white mallow, wymote (3, 6–8).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to western Asia and Europe, and is naturalized in the United States
of America (9, 10). Roots are obtained from commercially cultivated plants that
are at least 2 years old and harvested in the autumn (6, 10).

Description
A perennial herb with erect, woody stems, 60–120 cm high. Leaves alternate,
ovate to slightly cordate, serrate, velvety, large, occasionally 3-lobed. Flowers
pale pink, axillary, the calyx of each surrounded by a 6–9 cleft involucre. Fruit
a set of cocci united into a ring (11).

Plant material of interest: dried roots
General appearance
Cylindrical or tapering, slightly twisted roots, up to 2 cm thick, with deep
longitudinal furrows. Outer surface greyish-brown, bearing numerous rootlet
scars. Fracture externally fibrous, internally rugged and granular; section shows
5

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
a thick, whitish bark with brownish periderm, separated by a well-marked,
brownish cambium from the white xylem; stratified structure of the bark and
radiate structure of xylem become more distinct when moist. Peeled root
has greyish-white finely fibrous outer surface; cork and external cortical
parenchyma absent (2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faint, aromatic; taste: mucilaginous (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Phloem with numerous long, thin-walled, non-lignified fibres arranged in tangential groups alternating with groups of sieve tissue, with a ground tissue of
thin-walled parenchyma; xylem containing reticulate or scalariform thickening
and bordered pits accompanied by lignified tracheids, a small amount of lignified parenchyma and occasional small groups of fibres with only the middle
lamella lignified; xylem and phloem transversed by numerous non-lignified
medullary rays, mostly uniseriate; majority of parenchyma cells of the phloem
and medullary rays contain abundant small starch grains which are mostly
simple, spherical to ovoid, occasionally 2–3 compound, with a well-marked
circular or slit-shaped hilum; some of these parenchyma cells contain cluster
crystals of calcium oxalate 20–40 mm in diameter, while others exist as
idioblasts containing mucilage (1).

Powdered plant material
Brownish-grey (unpeeled root) or whitish (peeled root). Fragments of colourless, mainly unlignified, thick-walled fibres with pointed or split ends; fragments of reticulate or scalariform thickening and bordered pits; cluster crystals
of calcium oxalate about 20–35 mm, mostly 25–30 mm, in diameter; parenchyma
cells containing mucilage; fragments of cork with thin-walled, tabular cells in
the powdered material from the unpeeled root. Numerous starch grains, 3–
25 mm in diameter, with occasionally a longitudinal hilum; starch grains mostly
simple, a few being 2–4 compound (2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1, 2).

Purity tests
Microbiology
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (12).
6

Radix Althaeae

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% of brown, deteriorated drug and not more than 2% of cork
in the peeled root (2).

Total ash
Not more than 6% in the peeled root and not more than 8% in the unpeeled
root (2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 3% in the peeled root (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 22% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (2).

Swelling index
Not less than 10 (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (2). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (2), and the
WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12) and
pesticide residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (12) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Not less than 10% total mucilage in the peeled root as determined by gravimetric analysis (14).
7

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Major chemical constituents
The mucilage content ranges from 10 to 20% and consists of a mixture of acidic
galacturonorhamnans, neutral glucans and neutral arabinogalactans (6, 8, 9,
15–17).

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As a demulcent for symptomatic treatment of dry irritable coughs and irritations of oral and pharyngeal mucosa and as an emollient for wounds and dry
skin (8, 18–23). Also used in cough mixtures to mask the bitter or pungent taste
of other drugs (16).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of asthma, cystitis, dysentery and irritations of the gastric mucosa
(7).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
The demulcent effects of Radix Althaeae are due to its high content of polysaccharide hydrocolloids, which form a protective coating on the oral and
pharyngeal mucosa, soothing local irritation and inflammation (24).
Anti-inflammatory activity
A polysaccharide fraction (500 mg/ml) isolated from a root extract had anticomplement activity in human serum in vitro (25). Aqueous extracts of
the roots stimulated phagocytosis, and the release of oxygen radicals and
leukotrienes from human neutrophils in vitro (26). The aqueous extract also
induced the release of cytokines, interleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor
from human monocytes in vitro, thereby exhibiting anti-inflammatory and
immunostimulant activity (26). Intraperitoneal administration of isolated
mucilage polysaccharides to mice (10 mg/kg body weight) induced a 2.2-fold
increase in the phagocytic activity of macrophages as measured by the colloidal
carbon clearance test (27). However, intragastric administration of an 80%
ethanol extract of the roots to rats (100 mg/kg body weight) did not inhibit
carrageenan-induced footpad oedema (28).

8

Radix Althaeae
Weak inhibition (17%) of mucociliary transport in isolated, ciliated epithelium of the frog oesophagus was demonstrated after treatment of the isolated
tissues with 200 ml of an aqueous root macerate (6.4 g/140 ml) (29).
Antitussive activity
Intragastric administration of a polysaccharide fraction, isolated from an
aqueous root extract, to cats (50 mg/kg body weight) suppressed the intensity
and the frequency of coughs induced by mechanical irritation of laryngopharyngeal and tracheobronchial mucosa (30). The antitussive activity of this
polysaccharide fraction (50 mg/kg body weight) was as effective as Syrupus
Althaeae (1.0 g/kg body weight), and more effective than prenoxdiazine
(30 mg/kg body weight) (30).

Clinical pharmacology
None.

Contraindications
No information available.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Drug interactions
Simultaneous administration of Radix Althaeae may delay the absorption of
other drugs (8).

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
and laboratory test interactions; carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of
fertility; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy; nursing mothers;
or paediatric use. Therefore, Radix Althaeae should not be administered during
pregnancy or lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
No information available.

9

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Dosage forms
Peeled or unpeeled, broken, chopped or powdered crude drug (1, 2) and galenical preparations thereof. Store in a well-closed container, protected from light
(2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
For dry cough, oral or pharyngeal irritation: 0.5–3.0 g of crude drug as an
aqueous, cold macerate (14, 19, 20, 31) or 2–8 ml of syrup (20, 22, 32), which
may be repeated up to a daily dose of 15 g of crude drug. For gastric irritation:
3–5 g of crude drug as an aqueous, cold macerate up to three times daily (19,
20, 31).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
3. Farmakopea Polska V, Suplement I. Warsaw, Polskie Towarzystwo Farmaceutyczne,
1995.
4. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
5. Hooker JD, Jackson BD. Index Kewensis. Vol. 1. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1895.
6. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
7. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
8. Hänsel R et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Bd. 6: Drogen P–Z,
5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1994.
9. Leung AY, Foster S. Encyclopedia of common natural ingredients used in food, drugs, and
cosmetics, 2nd ed. New York, NY, John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
10. Leung AY. Encyclopedia of common natural ingredients. New York, NY, John Wiley &
Sons, 1980.
11. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
12. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
15. Blaschek W, Franz G. A convenient method for the quantitative determination of
mucilage polysaccharides in Althaeae radix. Planta Medica, 1986, 52:537.
16. Samuelsson G, ed. Drugs of natural origin, a textbook of pharmacognosy. Stockholm,
Swedish Pharmaceutical Press, 1992.
17. Tomoda M et al. The structural features of Althaea-mucilage representative mucous
polysaccharide from the roots of Althaea officinalis. Chemical and Pharmaceutical
Bulletin, 1980, 28:824–830.
18. Bone K. Marshmallow soothes cough. British Journal of Phytotherapy, 1993/1994, 3:93.
19. Marshmallow root. In: Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Bournemouth, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992:151–153.

10

Radix Althaeae
20. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 1. Elberg, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1996.
21. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
22. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 29th ed. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1989.
23. Weiss RF. Lehrbuch der Phytotherapie, 7th ed. Stuttgart, Hippokrates Verlag, 1991.
24. Franz G. Polysaccharides in pharmacy: current applications and future concepts.
Planta Medica, 1989, 55:493–497.
25. Yamada H et al. Relationship between chemical structure and anti-complementary
activity of plant polysaccharides. Carbohydrate Research, 1985, 144:101–111.
26. Scheffer J et al. Radix althaeae und Flores chamomillae Extrakte auf Entzündungsreaktionen humaner neutrophiler Granulozyten, Monozyten und Rattenmastzellen. In: Abstracts of the Third Phytotherapy Congress. Lübeck-Travemünde, 1991:
Abstract P9.
27. Wagner H, Proksch A. Immunostimulatory drugs of fungi and higher plants. In:
Wagner H, Hikino H, Farnsworth NR, eds. Economic and medicinal plant research. Vol.
1. Orlando, FL, Academic Press, 1985:111–153.
28. Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for antiinflammatory activity. Phytotherapy Research, 1987, 1:28–31.
29. Müller-Limmroth W, Fröhlich HH. Wirkungsnachweis einiger phytotherapeutischer
Expektorantien auf den mukoziliaren Transport. Fortschritte der Medizin, 1980, 98:
95–101.
30. Nosal’ova G et al. Antitussive efficacy of the complex extract and the polysaccharide of marshmallow (Althaea officinalis L. var. Robusta). Pharmazie, 1992, 47:224–226.
31. Wichtl M. Eibischwurzel. In: Wichtl M, ed. Teedrogen, 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1989:146–147.
32. British pharmaceutical codex. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1934.

11

Herba Andrographidis

Definition
Herba Andrographidis consists of the dried aerial parts of Andrographis paniculata (Burm. f.) Nees (Acanthaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Justicia latebrosa Russ., J. paniculata Burm. f., J. stricta Lam. ex Steud. (3, 4).

Selected vernacular names
Akar cerita bidara, alui, Andrographidis Kraut, bidara, bhoonimba, bhuinimo,
bhulimb, bhuninba, charayeta, charayetha, charita, cheranta, cherota, chiraita,
chiretta, chuan-hsin-lien, chuān-xı̄n-lián, công công, faathalaaichon, fathalaai,
fathalaichon, fathalaijone, halviva, herba sambiloto, hinbinkohomba, I-chienhsi, kalafath, kalmegh, kan-jang, kariyat, khee-pang-hee, king of bitters,
kiriathu, kirta, kiryata, kiryato, lanhelian, mahatikta, mahatita, naelavemu, naynahudandi, nelavemu, quasab-uz-zarirah, rice bitters, sambilata, sambiloto,
senshinren, sinta, xuyên tâm liên, yaa kannguu yijianxi (1, 2, 5–11).

Geographical distribution
Widely found and cultivated in tropical and subtropical Asia, south-east Asia
and India (6, 8, 10).

Description
A herbaceous annual, erect, up to 1 m high; stem acutely quadrangular, much
branched. Leaves simple, opposite, lanceolate, glabrous, 2–12 cm long, 1–3 cm
wide; apex acute; margin entire, slightly undulate, upper leaves often bractiform; petiole short. Inflorescence patent, terminal and axillary in panicle, 10–
30 mm long; bract small; pedicel short. Calyx 5-particle, small, linear. Corolla
tube narrow, about 6 mm long; limb longer than the tube, bilabiate; upper lip
oblong, white with a yellowish top; lower lip broadly cuneate, 3-lobed, white
with violet markings. Stamens 2, inserted in the throat and far exserted; anther
basally bearded. Superior ovary, 2-celled; style far exserted. Capsule erect,
linear-oblong, 1–2 cm long and 2–5 mm wide, compressed, longitudinally furrowed on broad faces, acute at both ends, thinly glandular-hairy. Seeds small,
subquadrate (1–3, 5, 10).
12

Herba Andrographidis

Plant material of interest: dried aerial parts
General appearance
Mixture of broken, crisp, mainly dark green lanceolate leaves and quadrangular stems; capsule fruit and small flowers occasionally found (1, 3). Stem texture
fragile, easily broken; leaves simple, petiole short or nearly sessile, lanceolate
or ovate-lanceolate, with acuminate apex and cuneate-decurrent base, lamina
crumpled and easily broken (2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight, characteristic; taste: intensely bitter (1–3, 9).

Microscopic characteristics
Leaf upper epidermis: stomata absent, glandular trichomes present, unicellular
and multicellular trichomes rare, cystoliths fairly large; lithocysts large (27–
30 mm thick, 96–210 mm long and up to 49 mm wide); columnar palisade cells;
collenchyma in midrib beneath epidermis; parenchyma cells spongy; vascular
bundles of lignified xylem in the upper part and lignified phloem in the lower
part; spiral, scalariform and reticulate vessels. Leaf lower epidermis: a layer of
wavy-walled cells; stomata diacytic; trichomes up to 36 mm in diameter and 180
mm long, and cystoliths present. Stem: epidermis has glandular and non-glandular trichomes. Collenchyma dense at the corners of stems; parenchyma contains chloroplastids. Endodermis composed of a layer of thick-walled cells.
Wood with spiral, scalariform and pitted xylem vessels; pith composed of large
parenchyma cells. Small acicular crystals of calcium oxalate occur in the pith
and cortical cells of stem and leaf (1–3, 8).

Powdered plant material
Leaf fragments in surface view show upper epidermis with underlying palisade
and cystoliths, lower epidermis with underlying palisade cells with stomata,
cystoliths and glandular trichomes. Leaf fragments in sectional view show
upper epidermis with palisade cells, spongy parenchyma cells, vascular bundles;
and lower epidermis with bundles of xylem associated with fibres; fragments
of spiral, scalariform, reticulate and pitted vessels; fragments of epidermal cells
from midrib; fragments of parenchyma cells in transverse and longitudinal
sections. Bundles of fibres. Fragments of epidermal cells from stem with
stomata, cystoliths and glandular trichomes. Scattered cystoliths; scattered unicellular and multicellular trichomes, mostly from epidermal cells in fruit walls;
scattered glandular trichomes from bundles of fibres in fruit wall; scattered
pollen grains (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, chemical tests, and thin-layer
chromatography for the presence of diterpene lactones (1–3).
13

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (12).

Chemical
Not less than 6% of total diterpene lactones, calculated as andrographolide
(1, 3).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1, 3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2% (1, 3).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 18% (1, 3).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 13% using 85% ethanol (1, 3).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12) and
pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (12) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Total ash test to be established in accordance with national requirements.
14

Herba Andrographidis

Chemical assays
Chemical and thin-layer chromatography methods are used for qualitative analysis of andrographolide diterpene lactones (1, 2). Titrimetric (1) and
high-performance liquid chromatography (15) methods are available for quantitative analysis of total diterpene lactones.

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are diterpene lactones (free and in glycosidic forms)
including andrographolide, deoxyandrographolide, 11,12-didehydro-14-deoxyandrographolide, neoandrographolide, andrographiside, deoxyandrographiside
and andropanoside (1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 16). The structures of andrographolide and
related diterpene lactones are presented below.
O
H
HO

14

HO
H
O

O

H

O

H3C

H
CH3

R

O
OH

Glc =

CH2

3

18

HO

12

11
H3C

O

R
H
O

H

CH2

3

HO
OH
b-D-glucopyranosyl

H
CH3

Glc

andrographolide R = H

neoandrographolide R = H

andrographiside R = Glc

andropanoside R = OH

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Prophylaxis and symptomatic treatment of upper respiratory infections, such
as the common cold and uncomplicated sinusitis (17–19), bronchitis (6, 9) and
pharyngotonsillitis (20), lower urinary tract infections (21) and acute diarrhoea
(22, 23).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Treatment of bacillary dysentery, bronchitis, carbuncles, colitis, coughs,
dyspepsia, fevers, hepatitis, malaria, mouth ulcers, sores, tuberculosis and
venomous snake bites (1, 2, 6, 7, 10, 16, 24–27).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of colic, otitis media, vaginitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, chickenpox, eczema and burns (6, 7).
15

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antibacterial activity
An ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited the growth in vitro of Escherichia coli
and Staphylococcus aureus (28). A 50% methanol extract of the leaves inhibited
growth in vitro of Proteus vulgaris (29). However, no in vitro antibacterial activity was observed when dried powder from the aerial parts was tested against
E. coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella typhi or Shigella species (30).
Anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) activity
Aqueous extracts of the leaves inhibited HIV-1 infection and replication in the
lymphoid cell line MOLT-4 (31). A hot aqueous extract of the aerial parts
reduced the percentage of HIV antigen-positive H9 cells (32). Dehydroandrographolide inhibited HIV-1 and HIV-1 (UCD123) infection of H9 cells at
1.6 mg/ml and 50 mg/ml, respectively, and also inhibited HIV-1 infection of
human lymphocytes at 50 mg/ml (33). A methanol extract of the leaves suppressed syncytia formation in co-cultures of uninfected and HIV-1-infected
MOLT cells (median effective dose [ED50] 70 mg/ml) (34).
Immunostimulatory activity
Intragastric administration of an ethanol extract of the aerial parts (25 mg/kg
body weight) or purified andrographolides (1 mg/kg body weight) to mice stimulated antibody production and the delayed-type hypersensitivity response to
sheep red blood cells (35). The extract also stimulated a non-specific immune
response in mice, measured by macrophage migration index, phagocytosis of
[14C]leucine-labelled E. coli, and proliferation of splenic lymphocytes (35). The
extract was more effective than either andrographolide or neoandrographolide
alone, suggesting that other constituents may be involved in the immunostimulant response (35).
Antipyretic activity
Intragastric administration of an ethanol extract of the aerial parts (500 mg/kg
body weight) to rats decreased yeast-induced pyrexia (36). The extract was
reported to be as effective as 200 mg/kg body weight of aspirin, and no
toxicity was observed at doses up to 600 mg/kg body weight (36). Intragastric
administration of andrographolide (100 mg/kg body weight) to mice decreased
brewer’s yeast-induced pyrexia (37). Intragastric administration of deoxyandrographolide, andrographolide, neoandrographolide or 11,12-didehydro14-deoxyandrographolide (100 mg/kg body weight) to mice, rats or rabbits
reduced pyrexia induced by 2,4-dinitrophenol or endotoxins (6, 38).
Antidiarrhoeal activity
Herba Andrographidis has antidiarrhoeal activity in situ (39, 40). An ethanol,
chloroform or 1-butanol extract of the aerial parts (300 mg/ml) inhibited the
16

Herba Andrographidis
E. coli enterotoxin-induced secretory response—which causes a diarrhoeal syndrome—in the rabbit and guinea-pig ileal loop assay (39, 40). However, an
aqueous extract of the aerial parts was not active (40). The constituent diterpene lactones, andrographolide and neoandrographolide, exhibited potent
antisecretory activity in vivo against E. coli enterotoxin-induced diarrhoea (40).
Andrographolide (1 mg per loop) was as active as loperamide when tested
against heat-labile E. coli enterotoxin-induced diarrhoea and more effective than
loperamide when tested against heat-stable E. coli enterotoxin-induced diarrhoea (40). Neoandrographolide (1 mg per loop) was as effective as loperamide
when tested against heat-labile E. coli enterotoxin-induced diarrhoea and
slightly less active than loperamide when tested against heat-stable E. coli
enterotoxin-induced diarrhoea (40). The mechanism of action involves inhibition of the intestinal secretory response induced by heat-labile E. coli enterotoxins, which are known to act through the stimulation of adenylate cyclase,
and by inhibition of the secretion induced by heat-stable E. coli enterotoxins,
which act through the activation of guanylate cyclase (39). Incubation of
murine macrophages with andrographolide (1–50 mmol/l) inhibited bacterial
endotoxin-induced nitrite accumulation in a concentration- and timedependent manner. Western blot analysis demonstrated that andrographolide
inhibited the expression of an inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase linked
to endotoxin-induced circulatory shock (41).
Anti-inflammatory activity
Intragastric administration of deoxyandrographolide, andrographolide, neoandrographolide or 11,12-didehydrodeoxyandrographolide to mice inhibited
the increase in cutaneous or peritoneal capillary permeability induced by xylene
or acetic acid, and reduced acute exudation in Selye granulocysts treated with
croton oil. 11,12-Didehydrodeoxyandrographolide had the most potent antiinflammatory activity in vivo (6).
Antimalarial activity
A 50% ethanol extract of the aerial parts inhibited the growth of Plasmodium
berghei both in vitro (100 mg/ml) and in mice after intragastric administration
(1 g/kg body weight) (42). Intragastric administration of a 1-butanol, chloroform
or ethanol–water extract of the aerial parts to Mastomys natalensis inhibited the
growth of P. berghei at doses of 1–2 g/kg body weight (43). Andrographolide
(5 mg/kg body weight) and neoandrographolide (2.5 mg/kg body weight) were
also effective when administered by gastric lavage (43).
Antivenom activity
Intraperitoneal injection of an ethanol extract of the aerial parts (25 g/kg body
weight) to mice poisoned with cobra venom markedly delayed the occurrence
of respiratory failure and death (6, 44). The same extract induced contractions
in guinea-pig ileum at concentrations of 2 mg/ml. The contractions were
17

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
enhanced by physostigmine and blocked by atropine, but were unchanged by
antihistamines (44). These data suggest that extracts of the aerial parts do not
modify the activity of the nicotinic receptors but produce significant muscarinic
activity, which accounts for its antivenom effects (6, 44).
Antihepatotoxic activity
The aerial parts and their constituent andrographolides have antihepatotoxic
activity in vitro and in vivo (45–54). Intraperitoneal administration of a methanol extract of the aerial parts (861.3 mg/kg body weight) to mice reduced hepatotoxicity induced by carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), and reversed CCl4-induced
histopathological changes in the liver (52). Intraperitoneal administration of
andrographolide (100 mg/kg body weight) to mice inhibited the CCl4-induced
increase in the activity of serum glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase, serum
glutamate pyruvate transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin and hepatic
triglycerides (52). Intraperitoneal administration of a methanol extract of the
aerial parts (500 mg/kg body weight) to rats also suppressed the CCl4-induced
increase in the activity of serum glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase, serum
glutamate pyruvate transaminase, alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin (51). Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the aerial parts (500 mg/kg body
weight) to ethanol-treated rats decreased the activity of serum transaminases
and suppressed histopathological changes in the liver (49). Andrographolide,
the major antihepatotoxic component of the plant, exerted a pronounced
protective effect in rats against hepatotoxicity induced by CCl4 (47), Dgalactosamine (54), paracetamol (48) and ethanol (49). Andrographolide was
more effective than silymarin, the standard hepatoprotective agent (47, 48).

Clinical pharmacology
The common cold
Herba Andrographidis has been used clinically for symptomatic treatment of
the common cold and uncomplicated sinusitis, pharyngotonsillitis, pneumonia
and bronchitis (6, 17, 18, 20). A placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial
assessed the efficacy of a standardized extract of the aerial parts (containing
4% andrographolides) for treatment of the common cold in 61 adult patients.
A significant reduction (P < 0.0001) in clinical symptoms such as sore throat,
tiredness, muscular ache and malaise was observed on day 4 in the group
receiving 1200 mg extract daily, as compared with the placebo group. No
adverse reactions were reported in either group (17).
A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind pilot trial was conducted
to evaluate the efficacy of a standardized extract of the aerial parts (containing
4% andrographolides) on the initial symptoms of the common cold and uncomplicated sinusitis. Fifty adult patients received either 1020 mg extract or a
placebo daily for 5 days. The results demonstrated that patients in the treated
group took less sick leave than those in the placebo group (0.21 day compared
to 0.96 day). Furthermore, 68% of treated patients felt totally recovered, as
18

Herba Andrographidis
compared with 36% of the placebo group. Also 55% of the treated patients
thought that the course of illness was much easier than normal, as compared
with 19% of the placebo group (18).
A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study evaluated a standardized extract of the aerial parts (containing 4% andrographolides) in the prophylaxis of the common cold in 107 schoolchildren during the winter season.
The children received either 200 mg extract or a placebo daily for 3 months and
were evaluated weekly by a physician. There was no difference in the occurrence of colds between the two groups during the first 2 months of treatment.
However, after the third month of treatment, there was a significant difference
(P < 0.05) in the occurrence of the common cold in the treated group (30%) as
compared with the placebo group (62%) (19).
A randomized, double-blind comparison study of 152 adult patients with
pharyngotonsillitis evaluated the efficacy of powdered aerial parts (6 g daily)
and paracetamol (1 capsule of 325 mg as needed) for improving symptomatology. Baseline evaluation showed no significant difference between the two
groups. The crude drug was as effective as paracetamol in reducing the incidence of sore throat and fever after 3 days of treatment (20). In a study without
controls, treatment of patients with a standardized extract of A. paniculata (containing 4% andrographolides) reduced the incidence of fever associated with
the common cold. The body temperature of patients treated with the extract
was lowered in less than 48 hours after treatment (55). This finding was confirmed in a later study (17).
Urinary infections
A clinical trial compared the efficacy of Herba Andrographidis, co-trimoxazole
(sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim) and norfloxacin in the prevention of urinary
tract infections after extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. Patients received a
5-day course of either Herba Andrographidis (4 tablets of 250 mg, three times
daily) or co-trimoxazole (2 tablets of 25 mg, twice daily) or norfloxacin (1 tablet
of 200 mg, twice daily). After 1 month of treatment, urinalysis results of 100
patients demonstrated that pyuria, haematuria and proteinuria were reduced
in all treatment groups, and there was no significant difference between the
three treatments (21).
Dysentery
The aerial parts have been used for the treatment of acute bacillary dysentery
and enteritis (2, 6, 22, 23). In clinical studies, the combination of andrographolide and neoandrographolide was reported to be more effective than
either furazolidine or chloramphenicol in the treatment of bacillary dysentery
(6). A randomized, double-blind clinical study of 200 patients compared the
efficacy of the powdered aerial parts with tetracycline in the treatment of acute
diarrhoea and bacillary dysentery (22, 23). Patients received capsules of either
the aerial parts or tetracycline (both 500 mg, four times daily) for 3 days. Compared with tetracycline, the aerial parts decreased the diarrhoea (both the fre19

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
quency and amount of discharge) (22). Furthermore, the aerial parts were more
effective in treating diarrhoea resulting from shigellosis than from cholera (22).
Infectious hepatitis
Administration of a decoction of the aerial parts to patients with infectious
hepatitis was reported to provide symptomatic relief (24).

Contraindications
Herba Andrographidis should not be used during pregnancy or lactation.
Herba Andrographidis is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of
the Acanthaceae family.

Warnings
Due to potential anaphylactic reactions, crude extracts of Herba Andrographidis
should not be injected (6, 56).

Precautions
Drug interactions
Extracts of Herba Andrographidis may have a synergistic effect with isoniazid
(6).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Herba Andrographidis extracts are not mutagenic in vitro (57) and have antimutagenic activity (58). A standardized extract of A. paniculata did not produce
reproductive toxicity in male rats after 60 days of intragastric administration of
20–1000 mg/kg body weight daily (59).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
In vivo studies in mice and rabbits suggest that Herba Andrographidis may have
abortifacient activity (6, 60). Conversely, no interruption of pregnancy, fetal
resorption or decrease in the number of live offspring was observed in pregnant rats after intragastric administration of an extract of the aerial parts at
2 g/kg body weight during the first 9 days of gestation (61). Since potential
antagonism exists between Herba Andrographidis and endogenous progesterone, Herba Andrographidis should not be used during pregnancy (2, 61).

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.
20

Herba Andrographidis

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug and laboratory test interactions; or paediatric use. Therefore, Herba
Andrographidis should not be administered to children without medical
supervision.

Adverse reactions
Large oral doses of Herba Andrographidis may cause gastric discomfort, vomiting and loss of appetite (6). These side-effects appear to be due to the bitter
taste of andrographolide (6). Anaphylactic reactions may occur if the crude drug
extract is injected (6, 56). Two cases of urticaria have been reported (18).

Dosage forms
Crude drug, capsules, tablets and pills (1, 2, 6). Store in a well-closed container,
protected from light and moisture.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
For pyrexia: a decoction from 3 g crude drug, twice daily (1, 5). For the common
cold: 1.5–3.0 g powdered crude drug three times daily, after meals and at
bedtime (1). For diarrhoea: a decoction from 3–9 g crude drug as a single dose
as needed (1, 5), or two tablets of 500 mg four times daily, after meals and at
bedtime (5).

References
1. Standard of ASEAN herbal medicine. Vol. 1. Jakarta, ASEAN Countries, 1993.
2. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. 1 (English ed.). Beijing, Chemical
Industry Press, 1997.
3. Thai herbal pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1. Bangkok, Prachachon Co., 1995.
4. Hooker JD, Jackson BD. Index Kewensis. Vol. 1. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1895.
5. Manual for cultivation, production and utilization of herbal medicines in primary healthcare.
Nonthaburi, Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of Public Health, 1990.
6. Chang HM, But PPH, eds. Pharmacology and applications of Chinese materia medica.
Vol. 1. Singapore, World Scientific, 1986:918–928.
7. Farnsworth NF, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at Chicago,
IL, January 28, 1998 production (an online database available directly through the
University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network
[STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
8. Kapoor LD. Handbook of Ayurvedic medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1990.
9. Hsu HY. Oriental materia medica, a concise guide. Long Beach, CA, Oriental Healing
Arts Institute, 1986.
10. Medicinal plants in Viet Nam. Manila, World Health Organization, 1990 (WHO
Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series, No. 3).
11. Materia Medika Indonesia. Jilid III. Jakarta, Departemen Kesehatan, Republik
Indonesia, 1979.

21

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
12. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
13. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Sharma A, Lai K, Handa SS. Standardization of Indian crude drug kalmegh by highperformance liquid chromatographic determination of andrographolide. Phytochemical Analysis, 1992, 3:3219.
16. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
17. Hancke J et al. A double-blind study with a new monodrug kan jang: decrease of
symptoms and improvement in the recovery from common colds. Phytotherapy
Research, 1995, 9:559–562.
18. Melchior J et al. Controlled clinical study of standardized Andrographis paniculata
extract in common cold—a pilot trial. Phytomedicine, 1997, 3:315–318.
19. Cáceres DD et al. Prevention of common colds with Andrographis paniculata dried
extract. A pilot double-blind study. Phytomedicine, 1997, 4:101–104.
20. Thamlikitkui V et al. Efficacy of Andrographis paniculata Nees for pharyngotonsillitis in adults. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 1991, 74:437–442.
21. Muangman V et al. The usage of Andrographis paniculata following extracorporeal
shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL). Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 1995,
78:310–313.
22. Chaichantipyuth C, Thanagkul B. Andrographis paniculata Nees as antidiarrhoeal
and antidysentery drug in Thailand. Asian Journal of Pharmacy, 1986, 6 (Suppl.):59–
60.
23. Thanagkul B, Chaichantipayut C. Double-blind study of Andrographis paniculata
Nees and tetracycline in acute diarrhoea and bacillary dysentery. Ramathibodi Medical
Journal, 1985, 8:57–61.
24. Chaturvedi GN. Clinical studies on kalmegh (Andrographis paniculata) in infectious
hepatitis. Journal of the International Institute of Ayurveda, 1983, 2:208–211.
25. Burkill IH. Dictionary of the economic plants of the Malay peninsula. Vol. 1. Kuala Lumpur,
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, 1966.
26. Singh VK, Ali ZA. Folk medicines in primary health care: common plants used for
the treatment of fevers in India. Fitoterapia, 1994, 65:68–74.
27. Siddiqui MB, Husain W. Traditional antidotes of snake poison. Fitoterapia, 1990,
61:41–44.
28. George M, Pandalai KM. Investigations on plant antibiotics. Part IV. Further search
for antibiotic substances in Indian medicinal plants. Indian Journal of Medical Research,
1949, 37:169–181.
29. Nakanishi K et al. Phytochemical survey of Malaysian plants: preliminary chemical
and pharmacological screening. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1965, 13:
882–890.
30. Leelarasamee A et al. Undetectable antibacterial activity of Andrographis paniculata
(Burm) Wall. ex Nees. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 1990, 73:299–304.
31. Yao XJ et al. Mechanism of inhibition of HIV-1 infection in vitro by a purified extract
of Prunella vulgaris. Virology, 1992, 187:56–62.
32. Chang RS, Yeung HW. Inhibition of growth of human immunodeficiency virus
in vitro by crude extracts of Chinese medicinal herbs. Antiviral Research, 1988, 9:
163–175.
33. Chang RS et al. Dehydroandrographolide succinic acid monoester as an inhibitor
against the human immunodeficiency virus (43225). Proceedings of the Society of
Experimental Biology and Medicine, 1991, 197:59–66.
34. Otake T et al. Screening of Indonesian plant extracts for anti-human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) activity. Phytotherapy Research, 1995, 9:6–10.

22

Herba Andrographidis
35. Puri A et al. Immunostimulant agents from Andrographis paniculata. Journal of Natural
Products, 1993, 56:995–999.
36. Vedavathy S, Rao KN. Antipyretic activity of six indigenous medicinal plants of
Tirumala Hills, Andhra Pradesh, India. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1991, 33:
193–196.
37. Madav S et al. Analgesic and antiulcerogenic effects of andrographolide. Indian
Journal of Pharmaceutical Science, 1995, 57:121–125.
38. Deng W et al. Comparison of pharmacological effect of four andrographolides.
Chinese Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1982, 17:195–198.
39. Gupta S et al. Antisecretory (antidiarrhoeal) activity of Indian medicinal plants
against Escherichia coli enterotoxin-induced secretion in rabbit and guinea-pig ileal
loop models. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1993, 31:198–204.
40. Gupta S et al. Antidiarrhoeal activity of diterpenes of Andrographis paniculata (kalmegh) against Escherichia coli enterotoxin in in vivo models. International Journal of
Crude Drug Research, 1990, 28:273–283.
41. Chiou W-F, Lin J-J, Chen C-F. Andrographolide suppresses the expression of
inducible nitric oxide synthase in macrophages and restores the vasoconstriction
in rat aorta treated with lipopolysaccharide. British Journal of Pharmacology, 1998,
125:327–334.
42. Misra P et al. Antimalarial activity of traditional plants against erythrocytic stages
of Plasmodium berghei. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1991, 29:19–23.
43. Misra P et al. Antimalarial activity of Andrographis paniculata (kalmegh) against Plasmodium berghei NK 65 in Mastomys natalensis. International Journal of Pharmacognosy,
1992, 30:263–274.
44. Nazimudeen SK et al. Effect of Andrographis paniculata on snake venom-induced
death and its mechanism. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1978, 40:132–
134.
45. Chander R et al. Antihepatotoxic activity of diterpene of Andrographis paniculata
(kalmegh) against Plasmodium berghei-induced hepatic damage in Mastomys natalensis. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1995, 33:135–138.
46. Bhaumik A, Sharma MC. Therapeutic effect of two herbal preparations in induced
hepatopathy in sheep. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 1993, 12:33–42.
47. Kapil A. Antihepatotoxic effects of major diterpenoid constituents of Andrographis
paniculata. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1993, 46:182–185.
48. Visen PKS et al. Andrographolide protects rat hepatocytes against paracetamolinduced damage. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1993, 40:131–136.
49. Pramyothin P et al. Hepatoprotective effect of Andrographis paniculata and its constituent, andrographolide, on ethanol hepatotoxicity in rats. Asia Pacific Journal of
Pharmacology, 1993, 9:73–78.
50. Choudhury B, Poddar MK. Andrographolide and kalmegh (Andrographis paniculata)
extract: effect on rat liver and serum transaminases. IRCS Medical Sciences, 1984,
12:466–467.
51. Sharma A et al. Antihepatotoxic activity of some plants used in herbal formulations.
Fitoterapia, 1991, 22:131–138.
52. Handa SS, Sharma A. Hepatoprotective activity of andrographolide from Andrographis paniculata against carbon tetrachloride. Indian Journal of Medical Research,
1990, 92:276–283.
53. Rana AC, Avadhoot Y. Hepatoprotective effects of Andrographis paniculata against
carbon tetrachloride-induced liver damage. Archives of Pharmacy Research, 1991, 14:
93–95.
54. Saraswat B et al. Effect of andrographolide against galactosamine-induced hepatotoxicity. Fitoterapia, 1995, 66:415.
55. Pharmacology department, Sichuan Institute of Chinese Materia Medica. Primary
study on the treatment of epidemic cold with Andrographis paniculata Nees A, B,

23

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
C. Sichuan Communications on Chinese Traditional Medicine and Herbal Drugs, 1975,
1:21.
56. Yin XJ et al. A study on the mutagenicity of 102 raw pharmaceuticals used in
Chinese traditional medicine. Mutation Research, 1991, 260:73–82.
57. Liu DX et al. Antimutagenicity screening of water extracts from 102 kinds of
Chinese medicinal herbs. Chung-kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chi Li, 1990, 15:617–622.
58. Burgos RA et al. Testicular toxicity assessment of Andrographis paniculata dried
extract in rat. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1997, 58:219–224.
59. Shamsuzzoha M et al. Antifertility effect in mice of medicinal plant family
Acanthaceae. Lancet, 1978, ii:900.
60. Hancke J. Reproductive toxicity study of Andrographis paniculata extract by oral administration to pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats. Santiago, Pontifica Universidad Catolica de
Chile, 1997.
61. Panossian A et al. Effect of Andrographis paniculata extract on progesterone in blood
plasma of pregnant rats. Phytomedicine, 1999, 6:157–161.

24

Radix Angelicae Sinensis

Definition
Radix Angelicae Sinensis consists of the dried roots of Angelica sinensis (Oliv.)
Diels (Apiaceae) (1).

Synonyms
Although Angelica sinensis has also been referred to as Angelica polymorpha
Maxim. var. sinensis (the latter being a synonym for A. polymorpha Maxim. (2)),
their synonymy has not yet been firmly established (J.C. Regalado, personal
communication, 1999). Apiaceae are also known as Umbelliferae.

Selected vernacular names
Can qui, Chinese Angelica, dangdanggui, dang gui, dong quai, duong qui
handanggui, hashyshat almalak, kara toki, langdu danggui, min-gui, tang-kuei,
tangkuei tần q́ui (1, 3–6).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to China (3, 4).

Description
A fragrant, perennial herb, 0.5–1.0 m high. Stem glabrous and purplish, with
light, linear striations. Inferior leaves tripinnate; superior leaves often pinnate;
segments oval, dentate-incised, teeth obtuse. Petiole 3–11 cm long, sheathed;
bracts rudimentary, not prominent. Umbels 10–14, radiate on top of the plant,
rays irregular, interior margin uneven; bracteoles, narrow-linear 2–4; pedicels
slender; carpophore bipartite; each umbel multiflorous (12–36 flowers); umbel
stem 0.3–1.5 cm long. Flowers white, 5 petals, glabrous, incurvate at the tips.
Carpels dorsally compressed, square-elliptical, the base cordiform, the tip
rounded or lightly notched; dorsal veins 5, closely placed, projecting; central
vein barely winged, marginal veins with very large wings; ducts oleaginous, 1
in each sinus, 2 in the commissure (4).
25

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Plant material of interest: dried roots
General appearance
Somewhat cylindrical, 3–5 or more branches at the lower part, 15–25 cm long.
Externally yellowish-brown to brown, longitudinally wrinkled and transversely
lenticellate. Root stocks 1.5–4 cm in diameter, annulated, apex obtuse, showing
purple or yellowish-green remains of stems and leaf sheaths; main roots lumpy
on the surface, branching roots 0.3–1.0 cm in diameter, upper portion thick and
lower portion thin, mostly twisted, with a few rootlet scars. Texture flexible,
fracture yellowish-white or yellowish-brown, thick epidermis, showing some
clefts and numerous brown spotted secretory cavities; wood paler in colour
than the bark, cambium ring yellowish-brown (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: strongly aromatic; taste: sweet, pungent, slightly bitter (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Cork cells in several layers. Cortex narrow, with a few scattered oil cavities.
Phloem cleft, broad (25–160 mm in diameter), relatively large on outer side,
gradually becoming smaller, surrounded by 6–9 secretory cells, oil cavities and
oil tubes. Cambium in a ring. Xylem rays, 3–5 cells wide; vessels scattered
singly or in groups of 2–3, arranged radially; parenchymatous cells contain
starch grains (1).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-brown; parenchymatous cells in phloem are fusiform, with slightly
thickened walls, very oblique criss-cross striations, thin transverse septa
sometimes visible; scalariform and reticulate vessels frequent, up to 80 mm in
diameter; fragments of oil cavities sometimes visible (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (7).

Foreign organic matter
Free of foreign matter (1).
26

Radix Angelicae Sinensis

Total ash
Not more than 7.0% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2.0% (1).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 45% using 70% ethanol (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (8). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (8), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (7) and
pesticide residues (9).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (7).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (7) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, water-soluble extractive and loss on drying tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Methods for both qualitative and quantitative determination of the alkyl
phthalide components by high-performance liquid chromatography have been
developed (10, 11). National requirements for quantitative criteria should be
established with respect to the concentration ranges reported for the essential
oil (0.4–0.7%) (4) and ligustilide (0.5–5.0%) (10).

Major chemical constituents
The characteristic components are the simple alkyl phthalides (ligustilide, (Z)ligustilide, (Z)-6,7-epoxyligustilide, angelicide, (Z)-butylidenephthalide, butylphthalide, 2,4-dihydrophthalic anhydride), which are the major components of
the essential oil fraction of the roots. Other characteristic components of the
oil have been identified as terpenes (b-cadinene, carvacrol and cis-b-ocimene).
The non-volatile constituents reported are phenylpropanoids ((E)-ferulic acid,
27

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
coniferyl ferulate); benzenoids (valerophenone-o-carboxylic acid and vanillic
acid); and coumarins (angelol G, angelicone and umbelliferone) (3, 4, 10, 11). It
has been shown by high-performance liquid chromatography that the major
chemical constituent of the roots is ligustilide, which can account for over 5%
(10). Polysaccharide fractions of low relative molecular mass have also been
reported (12, 13). The structures of the characteristic constituents are presented
below.
O
7

O

O
O

O

6

O

O

H3C
CH3

O
CH3
(Z )-ligustilide

angelicide

H3C

CH3

H

H

H3C

CH3
OH

H3C

b-cadinene

CH3

CH2

CH3
H3C

CH3
H

(Z )-butylidenephthalide
((Z )-ligusticum lactone)

CH3

CH3
cis-b-ocimene

carvacrol

O
O

R

CO2H
CO2H

HO

CH3
OCH3

HO

O

OCH3
(E )-ferulic acid R = H
coniferyl ferulate R = Con

valerophenone-o-carboxylic acid
(ligusticumic acid)

R8
R7

O

O

O

R6
R

5

CH3
O

R5

R6

R7

R8

umbelliferone

H

H

H

H

angelicone

OCH3

H

CH3

Sen

angelol G

H

Ang

CH3

H

H

H2C

OCH3

C
CH3

O H
CH3
HO
Ang = angeloyl
HO CH3

28

vanillic acid

OH
Con = (E )-coniferyl

H3C

C

O

CH3
Sen = senecioyl

Radix Angelicae Sinensis

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None. Although Radix Angelicae Sinensis has been alleged to be useful for the
treatment of menopausal symptoms, a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical
trial concluded that 4.5 g of the root daily for 24 weeks did not alleviate
menopausal symptoms, such as hot flushes (14).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Treatment of menstrual disorders such as irregular menstruation, amenorrhoea
and dysmenorrhoea (1, 3, 15–19). As an analgesic for symptomatic treatment
of rheumatic arthralgia, abdominal pain and in the management of postoperative pain (1, 20). Treatment of constipation (1), anaemia (1, 20), chronic
hepatitis and cirrhosis of the liver (20).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of dehydration, lumbago, abnormal menstruation, menopausal
symptoms (including hot flushes), hypertonia and nervous disorders (18, 21).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Smooth muscle contraction
Hot aqueous extracts of Radix Angelicae Sinensis stimulated smooth muscle
contractions of the bladder, intestine and uterus when administered intravenously to dogs (10 g/kg body weight) (22). Intravenous administration of an
aqueous or 95% ethanol extract of the roots to cats, rats and rabbits increased
the strength of the contractions and tone of uterine smooth muscles (4). In vitro
assays demonstrated that a decoction of the roots stimulated the H1 receptor
of mouse uterus (23). The active constituent responsible for this activity is an
aqueous- and alcohol-soluble, non-volatile component, the structure of which
is unknown (4). Conversely, ligustilide, a constituent of the essential oil of
the roots, inhibited contractions of isolated uteri from various animal models
(20, 24). Intraperitoneal administration of ligustilide (0.14 ml/kg body weight)
to guinea-pigs inhibited asthmatic reactions induced by acetylcholine and histamine (25). Ligustilide (32.5–130.0 ml/ml) inhibited smooth muscle contractions
induced by barium sulfate, acetylcholine and histamine in isolated guinea-pig
trachea (25).
Antihepatotoxic activity
Intraperitoneal administration of a decoction of the roots (11 ml/kg body
weight) ameliorated galactosamine-induced hepatotoxicity in rats (26). Ferulic
29

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
acid, a constituent of the roots, protected rat liver mitochondria against damage
induced by oxygen free radicals (27). Intragastric pretreatment of mice with sodium ferulate (100 mg/kg body weight) daily for 10 days alleviated liver toxicity induced by paracetamol (28) and prednisolone (29), and bromobenzeneinduced liver injury (30).
Cardiovascular activity
Cardiac haemodynamic studies demonstrated that intravenous administration of an aqueous root extract (2 g/kg body weight) to anaesthetized dogs
increased coronary blood flow from 88 ml before administration to 128 ml (per
100 g cardiac muscle/minute post-injection). Coronary vascular resistance and
myocardial oxygen consumption also decreased, while the heart rate decreased
or remained unchanged (31). An extract of the roots increased coronary blood
flow in isolated guinea-pig hearts (32).
In animal models, both aqueous and ethanol extracts of the roots had an effect
on arrhythmias induced by epinephrine, barium chloride and digitalis (32, 33).
Intravenous administration of an ethanol extract of the roots (4 g/kg body weight)
antagonized chloroform- and epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in cats (34).
Ethanol extracts of the roots and ferulic acid restored normal sinus rhythm after
ouabain-induced arrhythmia in isolated ventricular muscle from cats (20).
Aqueous extracts of the roots reduced the action potential amplitude and
maximal upstroke velocity of the Q phase, and prolonged the effective refractory
period and the duration of the action potential in guinea-pig myocardium (35).
Intravenous administration of an aqueous extract of the roots (50 mg/kg body
weight) to rabbits with ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery
provided protection against ischaemia- and reperfusion-induced myocardial dysfunction and injury (36). An aqueous extract of the roots bound to nitrendipine
and diltiazem receptors, thereby demonstrating calcium channel blocking activity (37). A ligustilide dimer, isolated from the roots, inhibited [3H]nitrendipine
binding to dihydropyridine-sensitive calcium channels (inhibitory concentration
of 50% [IC50] 0.4 mmol/l) (38). Since calcium channel blockers are known to have
pronounced effects on the cardiovascular system, this activity may explain some
of the reported effects of root extracts on the cardiovascular system.
Antithrombotic activity
In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that extracts of the roots inhibit platelet
aggregation and have antithrombotic activity (20). Aqueous extracts of the roots
(200 mg/ml) or ferulic acid (0.4 mg/ml) inhibited platelet aggregation induced
by ADP or collagen in vitro (39). A hot aqueous extract of the roots (500 mg/ml)
or ferulic acid (1 mg/ml) inhibited thrombin-induced platelet aggregation and
release of [3H]5-hydroxytryptamine from labelled platelets in vitro (39). An
aqueous extract of the roots inhibited both ADP- and collagen-induced platelet
aggregation when administered intravenously to rats (200 mg/ml) (20, 39). The
mechanism of action appears to be via inhibition of cyclooxygenase and throm30

Radix Angelicae Sinensis
boxane A2 synthase by ferulic acid, leading to decreased production of thromboxane A2 (40). The antithrombotic activity of the drug is associated with inhibition of platelet aggregation, reduction in the concentration of plasma
fibrinogen, changes in cell surface charge and a decrease in blood viscosity (20).
Intraperitoneal administration of polysaccharides isolated from the roots
increased haematopoiesis in mouse bone marrow, as determined by an increase
in colony-forming units in the marrow cells (12, 41). The polysaccharides
promoted the proliferation and differentiation of haematopoietic progenitor
cells in healthy and anaemic mice (13). Results of this study indicated that the
polysaccharides may enhance haematopoiesis by stimulating macrophages,
fibroblasts and lymphocytes in haematopoietic and muscle tissue to secrete
haematopoietic growth factor (13).

Clinical pharmacology
Menstrual disorders
Although there are a number of case reports concerning the clinical use of
Radix Angelicae Sinensis in the treatment of amenorrhoea and dysmenorrhoea,
these studies were published between 1899 and 1910 (15–18). Randomized,
controlled clinical trials are needed to confirm these observations. In these
early case studies, female patients were treated with 5 ml of a fluidextract of
the roots three times daily before meals for 1 week before menstruation. The
treatment relieved premenstrual pain and induced menstrual flow in most cases.
No abortifacient activity was observed in two pregnant women treated with
the same fluidextract (15). In other studies, the fluidextract was used for the
treatment of dysmenorrhoea in nulliparous women, and of severe bleeding in
multiparous women. Administration of 5 ml of the fluidextract three times
daily for 1 week before menstruation was effective in decreasing menstrual pain
and chronic endometritis (16). Successful treatment of amenorrhoea and dysmenorrhoea in female patients was further reported after administration of the
same fluidextract (5 ml, three times daily) (17, 18). In another report, 112
women with dysmenorrhoea were treated for 3–7 days with ligustilide dimer
isolated from the roots. The efficacy rate was 77%. Minor side-effects were
nausea and dizziness, which disappeared after the treatment stopped (42).
Smooth muscle contraction
Decoctions of the roots reportedly stimulated uterine smooth muscle in female
patients, but the doses used and the conditions being treated were not stated
(19). A decoction of the roots lowered whole blood viscosity after administration to six patients (11).

Contraindications
Radix Angelicae Sinensis should not be administered to children or patients
with diarrhoea, haemorrhagic diseases or hypermenorrhoea, and should not be
used during pregnancy or lactation (4).
31

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Drug interactions
Decreased prothrombin times were reported in rabbits that received both a
single subcutaneous dose of warfarin (2 mg/kg body weight) and a repeated
oral dose of Radix Angelicae Sinensis (2 g/kg body weight twice daily for
3 days) (43). Therefore, patients receiving anticoagulant therapy should be
advised against taking Radix Angelicae Sinensis without medical supervision.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug and laboratory test interactions; or carcinogenesis, mutagenesis and
impairment of fertility.

Adverse reactions
Oral administration of Radix Angelicae Sinensis is generally regarded as having few side-effects; however, headaches may occur in sensitive individuals
(14, 19). No adverse reactions were reported in 40 people who received an
aqueous root extract by intravenous administration (240 ml/person) for 30 days
(19).

Dosage forms
Powdered crude drug and fluidextracts (4). Store in an airtight container in a
cool, dry place protected from moisture (1).
32

Radix Angelicae Sinensis

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 4.5–9 g crude drug (1).

References
1. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Beijing, Chemical
Industry Press, 1997.
2. Hiroe M. Umbelliferae of Asia. Kyoto, Eikodo, 1958.
3. Hsu HY. Oriental materia medica, a concise guide. Long Beach, CA, Oriental Healing
Arts Institute, 1986.
4. Zhu DPQ. Dong quai. American Journal of Chinese Medicine, 1987, 15:117–125.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at Chicago,
IL, January 1, 1998 production (an online database available directly through the
University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network
[STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Medicinal plants in Viet Nam. Manila, World Health Organization, 1990 (WHO
Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series, No. 3).
7. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
8. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
9. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
10. Lin LZ et al. Liquid chromatographic–electrospray mass spectrometric study of
the phthalides of Angelica sinensis and chemical changes of Z-ligustilide. Journal of
Chromatography A, 1998, 810:71–79.
11. Terasawa K et al. Chemical and clinical evaluation of crude drugs derived from
Angelica acutiloba and A. sinensis. Fitoterapia, 1985, 56:201–208.
12. Ma LF et al. The effect of Angelica sinensis polysaccharides on mouse bone marrow
hematopoiesis. Zhonghua Xinxueguanbing Zazhi, 1988, 9:148–149.
13. Wang Y, Zhu B. The effect of Angelica polysaccharide on proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Chung Hua I Hsueh Tsa Chih, 1996,
76:363–366.
14. Hirata JD et al. Does dong quai have estrogenic effects in postmenopausal women?
A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Fertility and Sterility, 1997, 68:981–986.
15. Mueller A. Versuche über die Wirkungsweise des Extrakts des chinesischen
Emmenagogon Tang-kui (Man-mu) oder Eumenol-Merek. Münchener Medizinische
Wochenschrift, 1899, 46:796–798.
16. Langes H. Beobachtungen bei der Verwendung einiger neuer Medikamente.
Eumenol, Dionin und Stypticin. Therapeutische Monatshefte, 1901, 7:363.
17. Palm R. Erfahrungen mit Eumenol. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1910, 1:
23–25.
18. Buck P. Un nouveau remède spécifique contre la dysmenorrhée: l’eumenol. Belgique
médicale, 1899, 2:363–365.
19. Chang HM, But PPH, eds. Pharmacology and applications of Chinese materia medica.
Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA, World Scientific Publishing, 1986.
20. Mei QB, Tao JY, Cui B. Advances in the pharmacological studies of Radix Angelica
sinensis (Oliv.) Diels (Chinese danggui). Chinese Medical Journal, 1991, 104:776–781.
21. Duke JA, Ayensu ES. Medicinal plants of China. Vol. 1. Algonac, MI, Reference
Publications, 1985.
22. Schmidt CF et al. Experiments with Chinese drugs. 1. Tang-kuei. Chinese Medical
Journal, 1924, 38:362.

33

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
23. Shi M, Chang L, He G. Stimulating action of Carthamus tinctorius L., Angelica
sinensis (Oliv.) Diels and Leonurus sibiricus L. on the uterus. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa
Chih, 1995, 20:173–175.
24. Pi XP. Effects of Angelica sinensis on uterus. National Medical Journal of China, 1955,
40:967.
25. Tao JY et al. Studies on the antiasthmatic action of ligustilide of dang-gui, Angelica
sinensis (Oliv.) Diels. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 1984, 198:561–565.
26. Xiong X et al. The protective effect of Radix Angelicae Sinensis against acute liver
damage by D-galactosamine in rats: a histochemical study. Wu-han I Hsueh Yuan
Hsueh Pao, 1982, 11:68–72.
27. Lin YH et al. Protective effect of sodium ferulate on damage of the rat liver mitochondria induced by oxygen free radicals. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 1994, 29:171–175.
28. Wang H, Peng RX. Sodium ferulate alleviated paracetamol-induced liver toxicity in
mice. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 1994, 15:81–83.
29. Wu DF et al. Sodium ferulate alleviates prednisolone-induced liver toxicity in mice.
Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica, 1988, 30:801–805.
30. Wu DF, Peng RX. The effect of sodium ferulate on bromobenzene-induced liver
injury in mice. Zhongguo Yaoxue Zazhi, 1995, 30:597–599.
31. Chou YP. The effect of Angelica sinensis on hemodynamics and myocardiac oxygen
consumption in dogs. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica, 1979, 14:156–160.
32. Pen RX. Pharmacological effects of danggui (Angelica sinensis) on cardiovascular
system. Chinese Traditional Herb Drugs, 1981, 12:321.
33. Cha L. Effects of Angelica sinensis on experimental arrhythmias. Chinese Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1981, 16:259.
34. Cha L, Chien CC, Lu FH. Antiarrhythmic effect of Angelica sinensis root, tetrandrine
and Sophora flavescens root. Chinese Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1981, 16:53–54.
35. Wei ZM et al. A study on the electrophysiology in antiarrhythmia effect of
Angelica sinensis. Journal of Beijing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 1985, 8:40.
36. Chen SG et al. Protective effects of Angelica sinensis on myocardial ischemia/
reperfusion injury in rabbits. Chung-kuo Chung His I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 1995,
15:486–488.
37. Hon PM. A ligustilide dimer from Angelica sinensis. Phytochemistry, 1990, 29:1189–
1191.
38. Han GQ. The screening of Chinese traditional drugs by biological assay and the isolation of some active components. International Journal of Chinese Medicine, 1991,
16:1–17.
39. Yin ZZ. The effect of danggui (Angelica sinensis) and its ingredient ferulic acid on rat
platelet aggregation and release of 5-HT. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica, 1980, 15:321.
40. Xu LN. Effect of sodium ferulate on arachidonic acid metabolism. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica, 1990, 25:412.
41. Chen YC, Gao YQ. Research on the mechanism of blood-tonifying effect of danggui buxue decoction. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 1994, 19:43–45, 63.
42. Compendium of materia medica. Shanghai, State Administration of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Shanghai Science and Technical Press, 1996:1341–1355.
43. Lo A et al. Danggui (Angelica sinensis) affects the pharmacodynamics but not the
pharmacokinetics of warfarin in rabbits. European Journal of Drug Metabolism and
Pharmacokinetics, 1995, 20:55–60.

34

Flos Calendulae

Definition
Flos Calendulae consists of the dried ligulate florets or composite flowers of
Calendula officinalis L. (Asteraceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Asteraceae are also known as Compositae.

Selected vernacular names
Atunjaq, calendula, Chinese safflower, cuc kim tiên, djamir, djomaira, feminell,
flamenquilla, fleur de calandule, fleur de souci, fleur de souci officinal, fleurs
de tous les mois, garden marigold, gold-bloom, Goldblume, gole hamisheh
bahar, hen and chickens, Körömvirag, lellousha, maravilla, marigold, mary-bud,
ok-hhawan, pot marigold, qaraqus, qawqhan, quaqahan, ringflower,
Ringelblüten, saialill, sciure’e Sant’antonio, souci, souci des jardins, tabsoult,
toukinsenka, tousslat, uchu k’aspa, virreina, xu xi, zergul zerzira, zobeida,
zubaydah (4–7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to central, eastern and southern Europe. Cultivated commercially
in North America, the Balkans, Eastern Europe and Germany (6, 8).

Description
An annual herb, much branched from the base, very aromatic, up to 0.3–0.6 m
high; stem angular, hairy and solid. Leaves sessile, light green, with semiamplexicaul base; entire, undulate or remotely denticulate; glandular hairs on
both surfaces; lower leaves spatulate, obtuse, sometimes acute at the apex,
10–20 cm long and 1–4 cm wide; higher leaves oblong and mucronate, 4–7 cm
long. Involucral bracts 7–15 mm long, covered with long, glandular hairs; inner
involucral bracts with pellucid, scarious margin; marginal flowers in cultivated
plants often multi-seriate; corolla oblong-spatulate, bright yellow or orange,
15–25 mm long and 3 mm wide, 1–3-toothed with 4 or 5 veins, marginally
entire, covered at the base with patent, long, thick hairs; corolla of disc flowers
rounded, 3-dentate top, 1.5–2.5 cm long and 4–7 mm in diameter, 5 mm long
35

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
tube and moderately widened limb. Stigma short, thick, hairy; ovary oblong,
0.5 mm in length, pubescent, shrivelling after anthesis. Achenes narrowly
oblong, strongly curved, faintly ribbed, thinly pubescent or glabrous, 10–12 mm
long, outer achenes warty-ribbed outside, inner achenes prickly-warty, often
with broad, thick margins (2, 7, 9).

Plant material of interest: dried ligulate florets and
composite flowers
General appearance
Ligulate florets consist of a yellow, orange or orange-yellow ligule, 3–5 mm
wide and about 7 mm in the middle part, with 3-toothed apex and hairy, partly
sickle-shaped, yellowish-brown to orange-brown tube with projecting
style and 2-lobed stigma; occasionally with a partly bent yellowish-brown to
orange-brown ovary. Tubular florets about 5 mm long, consist of yellow,
orange-red or red-violet 5-lobed corolla and yellowish-brown or orange-brown
tube, hairy in its lower part, mostly with a bent yellowish-brown to orangebrown ovary (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faint, pleasantly aromatic (10, 11); taste: bitter (2).

Microscopic characteristics
Inner epidermal cells of ray floret elongated, rectangular and almost straightwalled, cuticle faintly striated; stomata absent; outer epidermal cells similar, but
with 3 or 4 anomocytic stomata; trichomes very numerous on the tube, biseriate; stigma epidermal cells straight-walled, polygonal. In disc floret, outer
epidermal cells elongated, straight or slightly sinuous-walled, stomata absent;
abundant trichomes on area below point of insertion of the stamens, mainly
glandular, uniseriate or biseriate. Within the upper part of the anthers, a layer
of isodiametric to elongated, moderately thick-walled, lignified and pitted cells;
pollen grains spherical, up to 45 mm in diameter, with 3 germinal pores, exine
finely granular with numerous short spines; apex of stigma covered by short,
bulbous papillae (2).

Powdered plant material
Yellow-green; fragments of corollas containing light yellow oil droplets; some
corollas with fairly large anomocytic stomata, others containing prismatic and
very small clusters of calcium oxalate crystals. Covering trichomes biseriate,
multicellular and conical; glandular trichomes with a uniseriate or biseriate,
multicellular stalk and a large, ovoid, biseriate, multicellular head. Spherical

36

Flos Calendulae
pollen grains up to 45 mm in diameter, exine finely granular with numerous
short spines and with 3 germinal pores; occasional fragments of stigmas with
short, bulbous papillae (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, and thin-layer chromatography for
flavonoid content (1, 2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (12).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 5% bracts and not more than 2% other foreign matter (1, 2).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1, 2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 20% (2).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12) and
pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12).

37

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (12) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.4% flavonoids, calculated as hyperoside, by spectrophotometry (1). A high-performance liquid chromatography method is also
available (15).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are triterpene saponins (2–10%) based on oleanolic
acid (i.e. calendulosides) and flavonoids (3-O-glycosides of isorhamnetin and
quercetin), including astragalin, hyperoside, isoquercitrin and rutin. Other constituents include essential oil, sesquiterpenes (e.g. caryophyllene) and triterpenes (e.g. a- and b-amyrins, lupeol and lupenone) (5, 6, 16). Polysaccharides
have also been reported (17). The structures of the characteristic triterpene
saponins and flavonoids are presented below.

H3C

CH3

calendulosides
H
CH3
H

R5

O O
O R3

H

O

CH3
CH3

R

R4

R5

A

H

H

Galp CH2OH

R

E

H

H

H

CO2H

F

Glcp

H

H

CO2H

H

Glcp

Galp

H

CO2H

H
H3C CH3

OH
OH

HO
HO
Galp =

R3

O

O
4

R

HO
H

O
OH

Glcf =

HO

O

O

OH

OH

Glcp =
HO

OH
b-D-galactopyranosyl

38

OH
b-D-glucofuranosyl

OH
b-D-glucopyranosyl

Flos Calendulae
R

R

X

astragalin

H

Glcp

hyperoside

OH

Galp

isoquercitrin

OH

Glcf

rutin

OH

Rhap-(1

OH
HO

O

O
OH

O

X

O O

HO
CH3
Rhap-(1

6)-Glcp

6)-Glcp

O

=
HO HO
HO

OH

OH
O-6-deoxy-a-L-mannopyranosyl-(1

6)-b-D-glucopyranosyl

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
External treatment of superficial cuts, minor inflammations of the skin and oral
mucosa, wounds and ulcus cruris (2, 18, 19).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of amenorrhoea, angina, fevers, gastritis, hypotension, jaundice,
rheumatism and vomiting (2, 5, 6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Phagocytosis
Three polysaccharides isolated from an aqueous extract of Flos Calendulae
enhanced phagocytosis in human granulocytes in vitro in the colloidal carbon clearance test (17). Intraperitoneal injection of a polysaccharide fraction isolated from an aqueous extract of the flowers to mice (10 mg/kg body weight)
enhanced phagocytosis (20). Intraperitoneal administration of an unsaponifiable
fraction (0.5 ml) of a hydroalcoholic extract of the flowers weakly stimulated
phagocytosis in mice inoculated with Escherichia coli. However, the hydroalcoholic extract was not active (21).
39

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Antimicrobial activity
The essential oil of the flowers inhibited the growth in vitro of Bacillus subtilis,
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida albicans (22). A flavonoid fraction isolated from the flowers inhibited the growth
in vitro of S. aureus, Sarcina lutea, E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Candida
monosa (23). However, chloroform, ethanol, methanol or water extracts of the
flowers did not inhibit bacterial growth in vitro (24–26). Acetone, ethanol or
water extracts inhibited the growth in vitro of the fungus Neurospora crassa (27).
Extracts of the flowers inhibited the growth in vitro of Trichomonas vaginalis (28).
Oxygenated terpenes appear to be responsible for the antimicrobial activity
(29).
Antiviral activity
A tincture of the flowers suppressed the replication of herpes simplex, influenza
A2 and influenza APR-8 viruses in vitro (30). However, an aqueous extract of
the flowers was not active (31). A chloroform extract of the flowers inhibited
the replication of HIV-1 in acutely infected lymphocytic MOLT-4 cells in vitro
(IC50 0.4 mg/ml) (32). A chloroform extract also inhibited HIV-1 reverse transcriptase activity in a dose-dependent manner (ED50 51.0 mg/ml) (32). A 5% hot
aqueous extract of the flowers (2 ml) inhibited the replication of encephalitis
virus after intraperitoneal administration to mice (33).
Anti-inflammatory activity
Topical application of a 70% ethanol extract of the flowers to mice at a dose
of 1.2 mg/ear (corresponding to 4.16 mg crude drug) reduced croton oil-induced
ear oedema by 20% (34). External application of a carbon dioxide extract of the
flowers (300 mg/cm2) suppressed croton oil-induced ear oedema in mice
(34). The triterpene fraction of an extract of the flowers had marked antiinflammatory activity in mice (1 mg/ear) against ear oedema induced by 12-Otetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (35). Faradiol esters isolated from the flowers
(240 mg/cm2) inhibited croton oil-induced ear oedema in mice (36). Intragastric
administration of an aqueous extract of the flowers (100 mg/kg body weight)
inhibited carrageenan-induced footpad oedema in rats (37). However, an 80%
ethanol extract of the flowers was weakly active (11% inhibition) at a concentration of 100 mg/kg body weight administered orally 1 hour prior to induction of oedema (38). Isorhamnetin glycosides isolated from the flowers
inhibited rat lung lipoxygenase in vitro (39).
Wound-healing activity
External application of a hydroalcoholic extract accelerated the rate of contraction and epithelialization of excision wounds in rats (40). A 3% freeze-dried
aqueous extract of the flowers induced vascularization in the chick chorioallantoic membrane assay. Histological sections of the treated chorioallantoic
40

Flos Calendulae
membranes also indicated the presence of hyaluronan, a tissue glycosaminoglycan associated with neovascularization (41).

Clinical pharmacology
Although no randomized, controlled clinical trials have been performed, two
case reports in the early medical literature support the traditional use of Flos
Calendulae. The reports describe the use of a strong tincture of the flowers
applied on compresses to reduce inflammation and suppuration, and to accelerate the healing of wounds (42, 43). These reports may be of historical value only.

Contraindications
Flos Calendulae is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of the
Asteraceae (Compositae) family (18).

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Saponins isolated from Flos Calendulae were not mutagenic at a concentration
of 400 mg/ml in the Salmonella/microsome assay using S. typhimurium strain
TA98, with or without S9 metabolic activation (44). Extracts of the flowers were
not carcinogenic after daily intragastric administration of 0.15 g/kg body weight
to rats (for 22 months) or hamsters (for 18 months) (45). Mutagenicity testing of
the fluidextract in the Salmonella/microsome assay (using S. typhimurium strains
TA98, TA100, TA1535 and TA1537) was negative at concentrations of up to
5 mg/plate. The mouse bone marrow micronucleus test was also negative after
daily administration of up to 1 g/kg body weight for 2 days (46). A fluidextract
of the flowers (100 mg/ml, 60% ethanol) was genotoxic in both mitotic
crossing-over and chromosome segregation when assayed for mitotic segregation in the heterozygous diploid D-30 of Aspergillus nidulans (46).

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; teratogenic and nonteratogenic effects in pregnancy; nursing mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore,
Flos Calendulae should not be administered during pregnancy or lactation or
to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Weak skin-sensitization has been reported (47).
41

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Dosage forms
Infusion for topical use; aqueous and alcohol extracts, tinctures and ointment
for external use (2, 18, 19). Store in a well-closed container, protected from light
(1).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Topical application: an infusion of 1–2 g/150 ml (18). External use: a 40%
alcohol extract (1 : 1), or tincture (1 : 5) in 90% alcohol (2). For the treatment of
wounds, the tincture is applied undiluted; for compresses, the tincture is usually
diluted at least 1 : 3 with sterile water (18, 48, 49). Ointment: 2–5% (48, 50).

References
1. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe,
1999.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
3. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
4. Boulos L. Medicinal plants of North Africa. Cairo, Reference Publications, 1983.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
at Chicago, IL, January 28, 1998 production (an online database available
directly through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and
Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
7. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston,
1950.
8. Leung AY, Foster S. Encyclopedia of common natural ingredients used in food, drugs, and
cosmetics, 2nd ed. New York, NY, John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
9. Backer CA, Van den Brink B. Flora of Java. Vol. 2. Noordfog-Groningen, NVP, 1965:
574.
10. Pharmacopoea helvetica, 8th ed. Berne, Département fédéral de l’intérieur, 1997.
11. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
12. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
13. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Vidal-Ollivier E et al. Dosage par CLHP. Des flavonoides majoritaires de Calendula
officinalis L. En fonction de la variété culturale et de la date de récolte. Pharmaceutica
Acta Helvetiae, 1991, 66:318–320.
16. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
17. Varljen J, Lipták A, Wagner H. Structural analysis of a rhamnoarabinogalactan
and arabinogalactans with immunostimulating activity from Calendula officinalis.
Phytochemistry, 1989, 28:2379–2383.
18. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 1. Elburg, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1996.
19. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.

42

Flos Calendulae
20. Wagner H et al. Immunstimulierend wirkende Polysaccharide (Heteroglykane) aus
höheren Pflanzen. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1985, 7:1069–1075.
21. Delaveau P et al. Drogues végétales stimulant l’activité phagocytaire du système
réticulo-endothélial. Planta Medica, 1980, 40:49–54.
22. Janssen AM et al. Screening for antimicrobial activity of some essential oils by the
agar overlay technique. Pharmaceutisch Weekblad, 1986, 8:289–292.
23. Tarle D, Dvorzak I. Antimicrobial substances in Flos Calendulae. Farmacevtski Vestnik
(Ljubljana), 1989, 40:117–120.
24. Rios JL, Recio MC, Villar A. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants employed
in the Spanish Mediterranean area. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1987, 21:139–
152.
25. Dornberger K, Lich H. Screening for antimicrobial and presumed cancerostatic plant
metabolites. Pharmazie, 1982, 37:215–221.
26. Acevedo JG, Lopez JL, Cortes GM. In vitro antimicrobial activity of various plant
extracts used by purepecha against some Enterobacteriaceae. International Journal of
Pharmacognosy, 1993, 31:61–64.
27. Kubas J. Investigations on known or potential antitumoral plants by means of microbiological tests. Part III. Activity of some cultivated plant species in Neurospora crassa
test. Acta Biologica Cracoviensia Series Botanica, 1972, 15:87–100.
28. Racz G et al. Trichomonicidal and anthelmintic activity of Roumanian folkloric
plants. Planta Medica, 1980, 39:257A.
29. Gracza L. Oxygen-containing terpene derivatives from Calendula officinalis. Planta
Medica, 1987, 53:227.
30. Bogdanova NS et al. Study of antiviral properties of Calendula officinalis. Farmakol
Toksikol (Moscow), 1970, 33:349.
31. May G, Willuhn G. Antiviral activity of aqueous extracts from medicinal plants in
tissue cultures. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1978, 28:1–7.
32. Kalvatchev Z et al. Anti-HIV activity of extracts from Calendula officinalis flowers.
Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy, 1997, 51:176–180.
33. Fokina GI et al. Experimental therapy of tick-borne encephalitis. Soviet Progress in
Virology, 1991, 1:27–31.
34. Della-Loggia R et al. The role of triterpenoids in the topical anti-inflammatory
activity of Calendula officinalis flowers. Planta Medica, 1994, 60:516–520.
35. Akihisa T et al. Triterpene alcohols from the flowers of Compositae and their antiinflammatory effects. Phytochemistry, 1996, 43:1255–1260.
36. Zitterl-Eglseer K et al. Anti-oedematous activities of the main triterpendiol esters of
marigold (Calendula officinalis L.). Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1997, 57:139–144.
37. Peyroux J et al. Anti-oedemic and anti-hyperhaemic properties of Calendula officinalis L. Plantes médicinales et Phytotherapie, 1981, 15:210–216.
38. Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for antiinflammatory activity. Phytotherapy Research, 1987, 1:20–31.
39. Bezakova L et al. Inhibitory activity of isorhamnetin glycosides from Calendula officinalis L. on the activity of lipoxygenase. Pharmazie, 1996, 51:126–127.
40. Rao SG et al. Calendula and Hypericum: two homeopathic drugs promoting wound
healing in rats. Fitoterapia, 1991, 62:508.
41. Patrick KFM et al. Induction of vascularisation by an aqueous extract of the flowers
of Calendula officinalis L., the European marigold. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:11–18.
42. Livezey A. Some observations on our indigenous medical flora. Medical and Surgical Reporter, 1868, 19:85.
43. Reynolds RG. Calendula. Pacific Medical and Surgical Journal, 1886, 29:720.
44. Elias R et al. Antimutagenic activity of some saponins isolated from Calendula
officinalis L., C. arvensis L. and Hedera helix L. Mutagenesis, 1990, 5:327–331.
45. Avramova S et al. Source of new products for the cosmetic industry. Medical and
Biological Information, 1988, 4:28–32.

43

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
46. Ramos A et al. Genotoxicity of an extract of Calendula officinalis L. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology, 1998, 61:49–55.
47. Bruynzeel DP et al. Contact sensitization by alternative topical medicaments containing plant extracts. Contact Dermatitis, 1992, 27:278–279.
48. Willuhn G. Pflanzliche Dermatika, eine kritische Übersicht. Deutsche Apotheker
Zeitung, 1992, 132:1873–1883.
49. Van Hellemont J. Fytotherapeutisch compendium, 2nd ed. Utrecht, Bohn, Scheltema &
Holkema, 1988:113–114.
50. Hänsel R et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Bd. 4: Drogen A–K,
5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1994.

44

Flos Caryophylli

Definition
Flos Caryophylli consists of the dried flower buds of Syzygium aromaticum (L.)
Merrill et L.M. Perry (Myrtaceae) (1–5).

Synonyms
Caryophyllus aromaticus L., Eugenia aromatica (L.) Baill., E. caryophylla Thunb.,
E. caryophyllus (C. Spreng.) Bull. et Harr., Jambosa caryophyllus (Spreng.) Nied.,
Myrtus caryophyllus Spreng. (1, 5–8).

Selected vernacular names
Benefundi, choji, choko, chouji, choukou, clavero, clavo de olor, clous de girofle,
clove, cloves, colve, ding huong, dingxiang, flores caryophylli, Gewürznelken,
girofle, giroflier, glove, gurunful, harilik negipuu, kaan phluu, kaan pluu, kade,
kanumfari, karafwu, karanho, kau-phlu, konofuru, koronfol, lauang, laung,
lawang, Nägelein, osaragbogo-eze, qaranfal, qoranful, qronfel, szegfüszeg,
ud-nuwwar (1, 6–9).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to the Moluccas and southern Philippines, but currently cultivated in many tropical areas including Africa (e.g. Madagascar and United
Republic of Tanzania), South America, Indonesia, Malaysia and Sri Lanka
(7,8).

Description
Small evergreen trees, 10–20 m high. Leaves opposite, petiolate, lanceolate,
pinkish to dark green, with translucent, aromatic glands, have a pungent odour
when young. Inflorescence occurs as racemose panicles and bears buds that
take on the form of nails before blossoming. Flowers red with 4 concave, overlapping petals that drop off as soon as the flower opens; stamens numerous; 4
calyx lobes. Fruit dark red, fleshy drupe. Buds readily exude oil when pressed
or scratched with a fingernail (7).
45

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Plant material of interest: dried flower buds
General appearance
Flower bud 10–20 mm long, bright reddish-brown to dark brown; lower
part (the hypanthium) solid, cylindrical, somewhat flattened, 4-sided, tapering
towards the base and bearing at the apex 4 thick, triangular, divergent sepals,
alternating with 4 rounded, fragile, unexpanded, membranous, imbricated
petals forming a pale, nearly spherical head that encloses numerous stamens,
curved inward and inserted on a small disc, and a stiff, slender, erect, single
style arising from a depression in the centre. Externally wrinkled; internally,
hypanthium contains in its upper portion a 2-celled inferior ovary with numerous ovules attached to the axile placenta; has very large outer zone with numerous shining, oval oil glands near the periphery, numerous vascular bundles in
the centre and a dark, lacunose layer abutting on the central zone and columella
(1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic, strongly aromatic; taste: pungent, spicy, followed by
slight numbness (1, 3, 5).

Microscopic characteristics
Hypanthium epidermis of small, thick-walled isodiametric cells with very thick
cuticle, with stomata with no special subsidiary cells. Parenchymatous layer
containing numerous large (up to about 200mm long), oval, radially elongated,
schizo-lysigenous oil glands, arranged in 2 or 3 more or less intermixed layers.
Layer of parenchyma and collenchyma containing clusters of calcium oxalate
crystals, and traversed by small, irregularly arranged vascular bundles consisting of delicate, spiral vessels (up to 20mm in diameter), usually accompanied
by isolated fusiform, pericyclic fibres (200–650 mm long and up to 40 mm in
diameter), having strongly thickened lignified walls. Lacunous layer formed of
thin-walled parenchyma. The columella consists of a parenchymatous strand
with numerous closely arranged, small vascular bundles. Sepals, with epidermis resembling that of hypanthium and having numerous stomata on outer
surface; mesophyll with rounded or stellate cells, numerous ovoid oil glands
and clusters of calcium oxalate crystals, and traversed by a few slender vascular bundles. Petals, with epidermis formed of cells with straight, thin walls;
stomata, absent; mesophyll, undifferentiated, containing oil glands and cells
with clusters of calcium oxalate crystals, and traversed by small vascular
bundles. Stamens, with filaments having a central vascular strand and oil glands
beneath the epidermis; connective tissue, with a large oil gland in the apex of
anther walls, with fibrous layer and minute clusters of calcium oxalate crystals
along the line of dehiscence. Pollen grains, triangular, tricolpate, 10–20 mm in
diameter. Style, with epidermis similar to that of hypanthium, and consisting
of small collenchyma cells, with clusters of calcium oxalate crystals, radially
elongated oil glands, and traversed by 2 narrow vascular strands (1).
46

Flos Caryophylli

Powdered plant material
Dark brown; abundant fragments of collenchyma and parenchyma with
clusters of calcium oxalate crystals, fragments of epidermis with thick-walled
cells and few stomata; fragments of vascular or parenchyma tissue showing
broken or entire oil glands; numerous fragments of vascular bundles with
delicate spiral vessels, ranging from 6 to 45mm in diameter, mostly 6–10 mm;
occasional fusiform, rather thick-walled fibres, 4–20 mm wide; numerous
pollen grains, appearing either as equilateral triangular, with truncated, emarginate apices, or oval in outline, 10–20 mm in diameter; fragments of the fibrous
layer of anther wall; clusters of calcium oxalate crystals, 10–15 mm in diameter
(1, 5).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, and thin-layer chromatography for
the presence of eugenol and b-caryophyllene (1, 3–5, 10).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (11).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 4% open buds, peduncles and fruits; not more than 2%
deteriorated buds; not more than 0.5% other foreign matter (5).

Total ash
Not more than 7% (4, 5).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 0.5% (4).

Sulfated ash
Not more than 8% (12).

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05mg/kg (5). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (5), and the
47

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (11) and
pesticide residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (11).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (11) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, water-soluble extractive and alcohol extractive tests to be established
in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 15% (v/w) essential oil (1, 12), determined by distillation (5).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituent (up to 20%) is an essential oil, which is characterized
by the presence of eugenol (60–95%), eugenol acetate (2–27%), and a- and
b-caryophyllene (5–10%) (6, 8, 9, 14, 15). The structures of the major constituents are presented below.
CH3

CH3

OR

H
CH3

H 2C

OCH3

H3C

eugenol
R=H
eugenol acetate R = CO-CH3

CH3
a-caryophyllene

H
H3C

CH2
CH3

b-caryophyllene

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
External or local applications for the treatment of toothache, and minor infections of the mouth and skin (7, 14, 16). Also used as an antiseptic for dressing
48

Flos Caryophylli
of minor wounds, and, in the form of lozenges, for sore throats and coughs
associated with the common cold (7). The essential oil (1–5%) is used in mouthwashes (16).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of asthma, bleeding gums, dyspepsia, fevers and morning sickness
(9).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial activity
Ethanol (95%) or aqueous extracts of Flos Caryophylli inhibited the growth in
vitro of Staphylococcus aureus (17). The juice of the flower bud inhibited the
growth in vitro of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (minimal inhibitory concentration
[MIC] 1:160) (18). The powdered crude drug inhibited the growth in vitro of
Yersinia enterolitica when added to the medium at a concentration of 1–3%
(w/w) (19, 20). An aqueous extract of the flower buds inhibited the growth in
vitro of Bacillus subtilis (21). A chloroform extract of the flower buds inhibited
the growth in vitro of Cladosporium werneckii (22). A 50% ethanol extract of the
flower buds inhibited the growth of Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus niger,
Botrytis cinerea, Fusarium oxysporum, Penicillium digitatum, Rhizopus nigricans,
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, Candida albicans and Saccharomyces pastorianus at a
concentration of 500 mg/ml (23).
Eugenol, one of the active constituents of the flower buds, inhibited the
growth in vitro of Staphylococcus aureus, Propionibacterium acnes and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, with an MIC of 0.05, 0.05 and 0.80mg/ml, respectively (24, 25). In
other studies, eugenol had a broad spectrum of antibacterial activity in vitro,
inhibiting the growth of Clostridium sporogenes, Enterobacter aerogenes, Escherichia
coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella
pullorum, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus faecalis and Comamonas terrigena at
various concentrations (26, 27). Eugenol also had a broad spectrum of antifungal activity in vitro, inhibiting the growth of Alternaria alternata, Aspergillus
fumigatus, Aspergillus niger, Aspergillus flavus, Cladosporium werneckii, Cladosporium
cucumerinum, Colletotrichum capsici, Helminthosporium oryzae, Microsporum canis,
Penicillium expansum, Phytophthora parasitica, Rhizopus nodosus, Trichophyton
mentagrophytes and T. rubum at various concentrations (27–30).
Antiviral activity
An aqueous extract of the flower buds suppressed the replication of herpes
simplex virus (HSV) in vitro at a concentration of 50 mg/ml (31). An aqueous
extract of the flower buds had antiviral activity against HSV-1 in vitro (IC50
60mg/ml), and in mice (250 mg/kg body weight by gastric lavage) (32). A hot
49

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
aqueous extract of the flower buds suppressed the replication of HSV-1, measles
virus and poliovirus-1 in Vero cells in vitro at a concentration of 0.5mg/ml (33).
Intragastric administration of a decoction of the flower buds (750mg/kg body
weight) decreased HSV-1 genome titres and the severity of HSV infection in
mice with recurring herpetic lesions induced by ultraviolet light (34). Eugenol
at a concentration of 0.1–10 mg/ml demonstrated antiviral activity against HSV
and adenovirus-6 in vitro (35). Eugeniin isolated from the flower buds exhibited anti-HSV-1 activity in mice (36).
Anti-inflammatory activity
Topical application of a methanol extract of the flower buds (2mg/ear)
suppressed ear oedema in mice induced by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol13-acetate (37). A methanol extract of the flower buds inhibited interleukin-8
production induced by lipopolysaccharide in rat macrophages in vitro at a concentration of 0.1 mg/ml (38). Administration of eugenol (100mg/kg body
weight by gastric lavage or 50 mg/kg body weight intraperitoneally) inhibited
carageenan-induced footpad oedema in rats (39–41). Intragastric administration
of eugenol to rats (33 mg/kg body weight) suppressed footpad and knee oedema
induced by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (42). Administration of eugenol to rats
(50mg/kg body weight intraperitoneally or 100mg/kg body weight by gastric
lavage) inhibited carrageenan-induced footpad oedema (39, 41). Topical application of eugenol to mice and rats at a dose of 0.2–2.0mg/ear suppressed ear
oedema induced by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and ethyl phenylpropiolate (43–45). Topical application of eugenol inhibited carrageenaninduced footpad oedema in rats and reversed passive Arthus reaction in rabbits
(46). Eugenol inhibited the activities of cyclooxygenase (IC50 12–82mmol/l) and
lipoxygenase (IC50 20–100mmol/l) in vitro (41, 46–48). Eugenol also inhibited
the biosynthesis of prostaglandin and thromboxane in various biological
systems (27, 44, 49–51) and both eugenol and isoeugenol inhibited platelet
aggregation (IC50 1.8 mmol/l) (46).
Antioxidant activity
A petroleum ether or ethylene chloride extract of the flower buds exhibited
strong antioxidant activity in vitro at a concentration of 0.1% (52, 53). A
methanol extract of the flower buds inhibited lipid peroxidation induced by
carbon tetrachloride, ADP plus arachidonic acid, and ADP plus NADPH (IC50
1.7, 2.6 and 6.4mg/ml, respectively) (54). The antioxidant activity of eugenol
has been demonstrated in a wide range of in vitro systems (55–59).
Miscellaneous activities
The essential oil had spasmolytic activity in vitro on isolated guinea-pig trachea
and intestine (60, 61). Eugenol and caryophyllene had a narcotic effect after
intravenous administration of high doses (200–400mg/kg body weight) (27, 62),
and a sedative effect after intragastric administration of low doses (1–100mg/kg
body weight) to mice (60).
50

Flos Caryophylli

Clinical pharmacology
None.

Contraindications
Flos Caryophylli is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of the
Myrtaceae family.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
An aqueous or chloroform–methanol extract of the crude drug was not mutagenic in the Salmonella/microsome assay at concentrations up to 100mg/ml (63,
64). A hot aqueous extract was not mutagenic in the Salmonella/microsome
assay using S. typhimurium strains TA98 or TA100 at a concentration of
50mg/disk (63, 65). However, a 95% ethanol extract was mutagenic in the
Salmonella/microsome assay using S. typhimurium strain TA102 at a concentration of 10mg/plate (66). Eugenol was not mutagenic in vitro (Salmonella/
microsome assay; up to 600mg/plate) or in vivo (in mice; 200mg/kg body
weight, by intramuscular injection) (67–69). Local application of eugenol
reduced the carcinogenic activity of benzopyrene (70).

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; teratogenic and nonteratogenic effects in pregnancy; nursing mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore,
Flos Caryophylli should not be administered during pregnancy or lactation or
to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Allergic contact dermatitis has been reported in patients who were regularly
exposed to Flos Caryophylli or who already had dermatitis of the fingertips (71).

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, tincture (1 :5, 25% ethanol), lozenges and mouthwash.
Store in a well-closed container, protected from light (1, 5).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
51

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Daily dosage: crude drug 3–5g as an infusion (preferably taken hot), three times
daily; 25% ethanol extract (1:1) 3–5ml; tincture (1:5, 25% ethanol) 10–25ml (2).

References
1. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
3. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Beijing, Chemical
Industry Press, 1997.
4. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 13th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of Health and
Welfare, 1996.
5. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
6. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
7. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1993.
8. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
9. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
10. Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant drug analysis. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1996.
11. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
12. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
15. Leung AY, Foster S. Encyclopedia of common natural ingredients used in food, drugs, and
cosmetics, 2nd ed. New York, NY, John Wiley & Sons, 1996:174–177.
16. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
17. Perez C, Anesini C. Antibacterial activity of alimentary plants against Staphylococcus aureus growth. American Journal of Chinese Medicine, 1994, 22:169–174.
18. Fitzpatrick FK. Plant substances active against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Antibiotics
and Chemotherapy, 1954, 4:528.
19. Al-Khayat MA, Blank G. Phenolic spice constituents sporostatic to Bacillus subtilis.
Journal of Food Science, 1985, 50:971–980.
20. Bara MTF, Vanetti MCD. Antimicrobial effect of spices on the growth of Yersinia
enterocolitica. Journal of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants, 1995, 3:51–58.
21. Ungsurungsie M et al. Mutagenicity screening of popular Thai spices. Food and
Chemical Toxicology, 1982, 20:527–530.
22. Sharma A et al. Microbiological status and antifungal properties of irradiated spices.
Journal of Agricultural Food and Chemistry, 1984, 32:1061–1063.
23. Guerin JC, Reveillere HP. Antifungal activity of plant extracts used in therapy. II.
Study of 40 plant extracts against 9 fungi species. Annales de Pharmacie française, 1985,
43:77–81.
24. Himejima A, Kubo I. Antimicrobial agents from Licaria puchuri-major and
their synergistic effects with polygodial. Journal of Natural Products, 1992, 55:620–
625.
25. Kubo I et al. Naturally occurring anti-acne agents. Journal of Natural Products, 1994,
57:9–17.

52

Flos Caryophylli
26. Deans SG, Svoboda KP. Antibacterial activity of French tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus L.) essential oil and its constituents during ontogeny. Journal of Horticultural
Science, 1988, 63:503–508.
27. Laekeman GM et al. Eugenol, a valuable compound for in vitro experimental
research and worthwhile for further in vivo investigation. Phytotherapy Research,
1990, 4:90–96.
28. Garg SC, Siddiqui N. Antifungal activity of some essential oil isolates. Pharmazie,
1992, 47:467–468.
29. Rahalison L et al. Antifungal tests in phytochemical investigations: comparison of
bioautographic methods using phytopathogenic and human pathogenic fungi. Planta
Medica, 1994, 60:41–44.
30. Thompson DP. Fungitoxic activity of essential oil components on food storage fungi.
Mycologia, 1989, 81:151–153.
31. Takechi M, Tanaka Y. Purification and characterization of antiviral substance from
the bud Syzygium aromatica. Planta Medica, 1981, 42:69–74.
32. Kurokawa M et al. Efficacy of traditional herbal medicines in combination with acyclovir against herpes simplex 1 infection in vitro and in vivo. Antiviral Research, 1995,
27:19–37.
33. Kurokawa M et al. Antiviral traditional medicines against herpes simplex virus
(HSV-1), poliovirus, and measles virus in vitro and their therapeutic efficacy for
HSV-1 infection in mice. Antiviral Research, 1993, 22:175–188.
34. Kurokawa M et al. Prophylactic efficacy of traditional herbal medicines against
recurrent herpes simplex virus type 1 infection from latently infected ganglia in
mice. Journal of Dermatological Sciences, 1997, 14:76–84.
35. Lembke A, Deininger R. Wirkung von Bestandteilen ätherischer Öle auf
Bakterien, Pilze und Viren. In: Reuter HD, Deininger R, Schulz V, eds. Phytotherapie,
Grundlagen-Klinik-Praxis. Stuttgart, Hippokrates Verlag, 1988.
36. Kurokawa M et al. Purification and characterization of eugenin as an anti-herpes
virus compound from Geum japonicum and Syzygium aromaticum. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1998, 284:728–735.
37. Yasukawa K et al. Inhibitory effect of edible plant extracts on 12-Otetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced ear oedema in mice. Phytotherapy Research,
1993, 7:185–187.
38. Lee GI et al. Inhibitory effects of oriental herbal medicines on IL-8 induction in
lipopolysaccharide-activated rat macrophages. Planta Medica, 1995, 61:425–428.
39. Bennett A et al. The biological activity of eugenol, a major constituent of nutmeg
(Myristica fragrans): studies on prostaglandins, the intestine and other tissues.
Phytotherapy Research, 1988, 2:124–130.
40. Reddy ACP, Lokesh BR. Studies on anti-inflammatory activity of spice principles
and dietary N-2 polyunsaturated acids on carrageenan-induced inflammation in rats.
Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism, 1994, 38:349–358.
41. Saeed SA et al. Eugenol: a dual inhibitor of platelet-activating factor and arachidonic
acid metabolism. Phytomedicine, 1995, 2:23–28.
42. Sharma JN et al. Suppressive effects of eugenol and ginger oil on arthritic rats.
Pharmacology, 1994, 49:314–318.
43. Pongprayoon U. Pharmacognostic studies on the Thai medicinal plant Ipomoea
pes-caprae (L.) R.Br. (Pak bung ta lae). Acta Pharmaceutica Nordica, 1991, 3:184–186.
44. Pongprayoon U et al. Compounds inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis isolated from
Ipomoea pes-caprae. Planta Medica, 1991, 57:515–518.
45. Pongprayoon U. Inhibition of ethyl phenylpropiolate-induced rat-ear oedema by
compounds isolated from Ipomoea pes-caprae (L.) R.Br. Phytotherapy Research, 1992,
6:104–107.
46. Dewhirst FE. Structure/activity relationship for inhibition of prostaglandin
cyclooxygenase by phenolic compounds. Prostaglandins, 1980, 20:209–222.

53

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
47. Dohi T et al. Inhibition of lipoxygenase by phenolic compounds. Japanese Journal of
Pharmacology, 1991, 55:547–550.
48. Naidu KA. Eugenol—an inhibitor of lipoxygenase-dependent lipid peroxidation.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 1995, 53:381–383.
49. Chen SJ et al. Antiplatelet and calcium inhibitory properties of eugenol and sodium
eugenol acetate. General Pharmacology, 1996, 27:629–633.
50. Srivastava KC. Antiplatelet principles from a food spice clove (Syzygium aromaticum
L.). Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 1993, 48:363–372.
51. Wagner H et al. In vitro inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis by essential oils
and phenolic compounds. Planta Medica, 1986, 3:184–187.
52. Saito Y et al. The antioxidant effects of petroleum ether-soluble and -insoluble
fractions from spices. Eiyo To Shokuryo, 1976, 29:505–510.
53. Kramer RE. Antioxidants in clove. Journal of the American Oil and Chemical Society,
1985, 62:111–113.
54. Kumazawa N et al. Protective effects of various methanol extracts of crude drugs
on experimental hepatic injury induced by carbon tetrachloride in rats. Yakugaku
Zasshi, 1990, 110:950–957.
55. Aruoma OI et al. Commentary reaction of plant-derived and synthetic antioxidants
with trichloromethylperoxyl radicals. Free Radical Research, 1995, 22:187–190.
56. Davcheva Y et al. Study of the inhibiting activity of eugenol and isoeugenol by
chemiluminescence. Oxidation Communications, 1995, 18:250–255.
57. Kumaravelu P et al. The antioxidant effect of eugenol on CCl4-induced erythrocyte
damage in rats. Nutritional Biochemistry, 1996, 7:23–28.
58. Uchida M et al. Antioxidative effect of sesamol and related compounds on lipid
peroxidation. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1996, 19:623–626.
59. Wie MB et al. Eugenol protects neuronal cells from excitotoxic and oxidative injury
in primary cortical cultures. Neuroscience Letters, 1997, 225:93–96.
60. Wagner H, Sprinkmeyer L. Über die pharmakologische Wirkung von Melissengeist.
Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung, 1973, 113:1159–1166.
61. Reiter M, Brandt W. Erschlaffende Wirkung auf die glatte Muskulatur von Trachea
und Ileum des Meerschweinchens. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1985, 35:408–414.
62. Sell AB, Carlini EA. Anesthetic action of methyleugenol and other eugenol derivatives. Pharmacology, 1976, 14:367–377.
63. Morimoto I et al. Mutagenicity screening of crude drugs with Bacillus subtilis recassay and Salmonella/microsome reversion assay. Mutation Research, 1982, 97:81–102.
64. Rockwell P, Raw I. A mutagenic screening of various herbs, spices and food additives. Nutrition and Cancer, 1979, 1:10–15.
65. Yamamoto H et al. Studies on the mutagenicity of crude drug extracts. I. Yakugaku
Zasshi, 1982, 102:596–601.
66. Mahmoud I et al. Mutagenic and toxic activities of several spices and some
Jordanian medicinal plants. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1992, 30:81–85.
67. Green NR, Savage JR. Screening of safrole, eugenol, their ninhydrin-positive
metabolites and selected secondary amines for potential mutagenicity. Mutation
Research, 1978, 57:115–121.
68. Sekizawa J et al. Genotoxicity of safrole-related chemicals in microbial test systems.
Mutation Research, 1982, 101:127–140.
69. Amonkar AJ et al. Hydroxychavicol: a new phenolic antimutagen from betel leaf.
Food Chemistry and Toxicology, 1986, 24:1321–1324.
70. Merek K, Junginger H, Thiele B. Einige pflanzliche Substanzen als antikanzerogene
Phytotherapie. In: Reuter HD, Deininger R, Schulz V, eds. Phytotherapie, GrundlagenKlinik-Praxis. Stuttgart, Hippokrates Verlag, 1988.
71. Seetharam KA, Pasricha JS. Condiments and contact dermatitis of the fingertips.
Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, 1987, 53:325–328.

54

Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae

Definition
Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae consists of the dried rhizomes and roots of
Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt. (Ranunculaceae) (1)1.

Synonyms
Actaea gyrostachya Wender, A. orthostachya Wender, A. monogyna Walt., A. racemosa L., Bortrophis actaeoides Raf., B. serpentaria Raf., Christophoriana canadensis
racemosa Gouan, Cimicifuga racemosa (Torr) Bart., C. serpentaria Pursh, Macrotis
racemosa Sweet, M. serpentaria Raf., Macrotrys actaeiodes Raf. (4–6).

Selected vernacular names
Actée à grappes, black cohosh, black root, black snakeroot, bugbane, bugwort, bugwort rattleroot, cimicifuga, cohosh bugbane, Frauen Wurzel, herbe
aux punaises, macrotnys, macrotys, macroty’s, natsushirogiku, Qatil el baq,
racine d’actée à grappes, rattle root, rattle snake root, rattle top, rattleweed, rich
weed, schwarze Schlangenwurzel, squaw root, squawroot, Traubensilberkerze,
Wanzenkraut, zilberkaars (7–9).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to eastern North America (9).

Description
A perennial herb, up to 1–2.5 m high; subterranean part consists of a thick,
knotted rhizome system. Leaves compound, pinnate, up to 7 cm long; leaflets
serrate along the margin, subcordate to subcuneate at the base. Inflorescence a
long, wand-like raceme of white flowers with numerous stamens (9, 10).

1

Rhizomes and roots of Cimicifuga heracleifolia Kom., C. dahurica (Turcz.) Maxim. or C. foetida L.
are referred to as Rhizoma Cimicifugae in the Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China (2).
Rhizomes and roots of C. simplex Warm. and related species are referred to under the same name
in The Japanese pharmacopoeia (3).

55

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Plant material of interest: dried rhizomes and roots
General appearance
Mixture of entire and broken dried rhizomes and roots. Rhizome dark-brown,
hard, sub-cylindrical and somewhat knotted; 1–2.5 cm in diameter and 2–15 cm
long, with numerous, closely-arranged, upright or curved branches, each terminating in the remains of a bud or a circular, cup-shaped scar; branches about
1 cm in diameter and up to 3 cm long, marked with distinct, encircling leaf scars;
fracture horny; transverse surface showing a thin outer bark surrounding a
ring of numerous pale, narrow wedges of vascular tissue alternating with dark
medullary rays; a large central pith.
Roots attached to under surface of the rhizome or, more usually, broken
off leaving circular scars. Roots dark brown, 1–3 mm in diameter, brittle, nearly
cylindrical or obtusely quadrangular, longitudinally wrinkled; fracture short;
transverse surface showing a distinct cambium line separating the wide outer
bark from the central region composed of 3–6 wedges of lignified xylem tissue
united at their apices and separated by broad, non-lignified medullary rays
(1, 9).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight; taste: slightly bitter (1, 9).

Microscopic characteristics
Rhizome: yellowish-brown, suberized epidermis, several layers of starch- and
resin-containing cortical parenchyma, 2 circles of open, collateral, fibrovascular
bundles, the outer bundles being smaller than the inner; medullary rays separate the bundles and contain starch grains, spherical or polygonal, simple or 2–3
or even up to 6 compound; individual grains 3–15 mm in diameter with central
slit-shaped hilum. Xylem contains tracheae with bordered pits and numerous
strongly lignified wood fibres; and a central pith with cells resembling those of
the cortex.
Root: thin epidermis, a cortex, separated into 2 zones by a distinct endodermis, and 4–6, occasionally 3, open, collateral fibrovascular bundles separated
by broad, wedge-shaped medullary rays (1, 9).

Powdered plant material
Light brown, odourless with a bitter taste; abundant starch grains, often occurring in masses in numerous fragments of thin-walled parenchyma; groups of
small, lignified vessels with closely arranged bordered pits or, less frequently,
with reticulate thickening; lignified thin-walled fibres and xylem parenchyma;
fragments of brown suberized cells with thickened walls (1).
56

Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic and microchemical examinations (1, 9), and thinlayer chromatography for the presence of characteristic flavonoids and phenolic acids (1, 11).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (12).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 5% stem bases and not more than 2% other foreign matter (1).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 4% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 10% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (5).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12) and
pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (12) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.
57

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Chemical assays
Qualitative assessments may be based on the triterpene and isoflavonoid
content. Concentration ranges and quantitative methods need to be established.
A high-performance liquid chromatography method is available for the quantitative analysis of flavones (15).

Major chemical constituents
The major and characteristic constituents include the cycloartanol-based triterpenes acteol, acetylacteol, 26-deoxyacteol, cimigenol, actein, 26-deoxyactein
and cimicifugoside. (E)-Isoferulic acid and the isoflavone formononetin are also
found (4, 15–17). However, the latter compound could not be detected in
alcohol extracts of the root (15). The structures of the representative constituents are presented below.

O

O
H
H3C H
CH3
OH
H
CH3
26
H
12
OH
O O
H
H
CH3
H

H
HO
H3C

H3C

H
CH3

H

O

O

H3C H

CH3

CH3
H
O

H

OH

H3C

H
CH3

HO
OH
actein

acteol
O
H3C

H3C H
H
H

HO
H3C

H

O

CH3 OHH

CH3

CH3
H

O

H CH

O

HO CH3

O
H

3

H
O O
OH

H

H3C

CH3
H
CH3

CH3

HO
cimigenol

cimicifugoside

OH
HO

O

CO2H
H3CO

O
OH
(E )-isoferulic acid

58

O

H3C H

H

CH3

H

O

CH3

H
O O

26
OH

formononetin

OCH3

O

OH

Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Treatment of climacteric symptoms such as hot flushes, profuse sweating,
sleeping disorders and nervous irritability (18–26).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Treatment of premenstrual syndrome and dysmenorrhoea (27, 28).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of coughs, dyspepsia, epilepsy, intercostal myalgia, rheumatoid
arthritis, sciatica, snake bites, tinnitus and whooping cough (1, 8, 9, 28, 29).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Estrogenic activity
The estrogenic effects of Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae are controversial,
and have been assessed both in vitro and in vivo. The in vitro proliferation of
human mammary carcinoma cells (cell line 435) was measured after treatment
with an isopropyl alcohol extract of the rhizome. Treatment using concentrations below 2.5 mg/ml did not enhance growth of the cells. However, concentrations of 2.5 mg/ml and above significantly inhibited cell proliferation (30).
Similar results were obtained using the estrogen receptor-positive human
mammary carcinoma cell line MCF-7. When these cells were treated with a
40% isopropyl alcohol extract of the rhizome at concentrations ranging from
1 ng/ml to 100 mg/ml, the extract induced a dose-dependent inhibition of cell
proliferation and also augmented the antiproliferative effects of tamoxifen (31).
An extract of the rhizome (extract not specified) was tested in vivo for possible estrogenic effects in female rats. The extract was added to a standard liquid
diet and fed to ovariectomized rats daily for 3 weeks. An increase in uterine
weight was observed, along with an increase in serum ceruloplasmin levels,
suggesting estrogenic activity of the extract (32). However, in a short-term
study, intragastric or subcutaneous administration of a 50% ethanol extract of
the rhizome (30, 300 or 3000 mg/kg body weight) to immature mice daily for
3 days did not have any estrogenic effects, as assessed by changes in uterine
weight and vaginal cytology (33). Constituents of a chloroform fraction, isolated from a methanol extract of the rhizome, bound to the estrogen receptors
of isolated rat uteri in vitro. Formononetin, a minor constituent of the extract,
showed a low binding affinity to the estrogen receptor (11.5 mmol/l) (34). The
effects of formononetin and a dichloromethane extract of the rhizome on
luteinizing hormone secretion were tested in vivo (35). Ovariectomized rats
received nine intraperitoneal injections over 5 days (equivalent to a total
59

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
dose of 10 mg formononetin or 108 mg extract). The extract, but not formononetin, reduced the serum concentration of luteinizing hormone
(34, 35). Intraperitoneal (but not intragastric) administration of a chloroform
(140 mg), 60% ethanol (0.3 ml) or dichloromethane (27 mg) extract of the
rhizome reduced the serum concentration of luteinizing hormone in ovariectomized rats after 3–3.5 days of treatment (34, 36, 37). Serum folliclestimulating hormone and prolactin levels, however, were not affected
(34). Intragastric administration of a 95% ethanol extract of the rhizome
(0.05 ml/animal daily) had no effect on genital functions in female mice (38).
The effects of estradiol on estrogen-dependent brain and uterine functions
were compared with those of a dichloromethane fraction of a hydroalcoholic
rhizome extract. Daily injection of the extract (60 mg/rat) or estradiol for 3
weeks reduced serum luteinizing hormone levels, but only estradiol increased
uterine weight. Up-regulation of estrogen receptor-a gene expression was
observed in MCF-7 mammary carcinoma cells treated with either the extract
(35 mg/ml) or estradiol. The results suggest that the dichloromethane fraction
of the extract may act as a selective modulator of the estrogen receptor (39).
Anti-inflammatory activity
Subcutaneous injection of an ethanol extract of the crude drug (100 mg/kg body
weight) reduced carrageenan-induced footpad oedema in rats by 32% (40).

Clinical pharmacology
Climacteric symptoms
The following studies were all performed using oral administration of either
a 40% isopropyl alcohol or 60% ethanol extract of Rhizoma Cimicifugae
Racemosae.
In a placebo-controlled clinical trial, 110 women with climacteric symptoms
were treated with the ethanol extract (8 mg daily) for 2 months. Although a significant reduction in serum luteinizing hormone levels was observed in the
treated group (P < 0.01), there was no effect on follicle-stimulating hormone
levels (37).
A 12-week double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 80 women (aged
45–58 years) compared the efficacy of the rhizome extract (8 mg daily) with
either conjugated estrogens (0.625 mg daily) or placebo for the treatment of climacteric symptoms and vaginal atrophy. The group treated with the extract
showed a greater reduction in climacteric symptoms than groups treated with
either conjugated estrogens or placebo, as demonstrated by a significant reduction in both the Kupperman Index and Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety
(Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale), and by the proliferative status of the vaginal
epithelium (P < 0.001) (23).
The efficacy of the isopropyl alcohol extract for the treatment of climacteric
symptoms induced by hysterectomy was assessed in a randomized comparison trial without controls. Sixty women under the age of 40, who had
60

Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae
undergone a hysterectomy, but retained one ovary, were treated daily with
either the extract (8 mg), estriol (1 mg), conjugated estrogens (1.25 mg) or an
estrogen–progesterone combination. After 4, 8, 12 and 24 weeks of treatment,
a significant decrease in climacteric symptoms was reported by the patients in
all treatment groups (P < 0.01). This was verified by a reduction in a modified
Kupperman index. Conjugated estrogens or the estrogen–progesterone combination appeared to be slightly more effective than the extract; however, no significant difference between the three treatments was observed. Serum levels of
luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone did not change significantly in any of the groups (P > 0.05) (20).
In a study without controls of 50 women with climacteric complaints, after
administration of the ethanol extract (40 drops twice daily for 12 weeks),
patients with moderate symptoms required no further treatment (25).
A randomized controlled trial involving 60 women aged 45–60 years compared the efficacy of the ethanol extract with hormone replacement therapy
(0.6 mg conjugated estrogens) or 2 mg diazepam for the treatment of climacteric symptoms. Clinical assessment of the patients was based on three indicators: the menopause index (for hot flushes, nocturnal sweating, nervousness,
headache and palpitations), and the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale and selfassessment depression scale (for psychological symptoms). Patients were
treated with either the extract (40 drops twice daily), conjugated estrogens
(0.625 mg daily) or diazepam (2 mg daily) for 12 weeks. All three forms of
therapy reduced all three indicators. The extract and conjugated estrogens also
reduced atrophic changes in the vaginal mucosa (26).
In a study without controls, 36 women with climacteric symptoms were
treated with the ethanol extract (40 drops) twice daily for 12 weeks. A significant decrease in the average values of the Kupperman index was reported
(P < 0.001), and an increase in the values of the Clinical Global Impression scale
was observed (18).
A placebo-controlled clinical trial assessed the efficacy of a rhizome extract
for the treatment of 82 women with climacteric symptoms. In the group treated
with the extract, 31 women reported a considerable decrease in symptoms,
while 10 women with severe climacteric symptoms did not show improvement. In the placebo group, a reduction of symptoms was seen in four women;
symptoms were unchanged in 37 women (19).
In a study without controls, 50 women with climacteric symptoms, who had
received at least one or two intramuscular injections of estradiol valerate (4 mg)
and prasterone enantate (200 mg) during 1–2 months prior to the trial, were treated
with the isopropyl alcohol extract (2 tablets twice daily) for 6 months. The therapeutic results were rated as good to very good in 41 of the patients: during the treatment period 28 required no further injections, 21 patients required one injection
and one patient required two injections. The Kupperman index decreased significantly (P < 0.001), indicating successful treatment of symptoms (22).
A multicentre, drug-monitoring study without controls of 629 women with
climacteric symptoms assessed the efficacy of the ethanol extract (40 drops
61

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
twice daily) for 8 weeks. Symptoms improved in over 80% of all patients after
6–8 weeks of treatment (24).
A 6-month randomized, double-blind clinical trial compared two different
doses of the isopropyl alcohol extract (40 and 127 mg daily) in 152 women with
climacteric symptoms. A decrease in the Kupperman index was observed after
2 weeks in both treatment groups. Both dosages showed similar levels of efficacy and safety. After 6 months, approximately 90% of patients had responded
to the treatment. No effects on vaginal cytology or the levels of luteinizing
hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, sex hormone binding-globulin, prolactin and estradiol were observed (21, 41, 42).
A review of eight clinical trials assessed the efficacy of extracts of the crude
drug for the alleviation of climacteric symptoms in women. It concluded that
preparations of the rhizome may be a safe and effective alternative to estrogen
replacement therapy for patients for whom the replacement therapy is contraindicated or refused (43).
General gynaecological disorders
Five case studies have described the successful use of a 40% isopropyl alcohol
or 60% ethanol extract of the rhizome in the treatment of a total of 833 women
with gynaecological disorders (e.g. climacteric symptoms) and menstrual disorders (e.g. primary or secondary amenorrhoea, and premenstrual disorders)
(44–48).

Contraindications
Owing to its potential estrogenic effects (39) and the lack of data on its safety,
Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae should not be used during pregnancy or
lactation, or in children under the age of 12 years.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A 40% isopropyl alcohol extract of the crude drug was not mutagenic in
the Salmonella/microsome assay using S. typhimurium strains TA98 or TA100
(16).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Intragastric administration of up to 2 g/kg body weight of the crude drug, as a
component of two traditional Chinese medicines, to pregnant rats daily on days
7–17 of gestation was not teratogenic (49, 50). (See also Contraindications.)

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.
62

Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions or drug and laboratory test interactions.

Adverse reactions
Minor gastrointestinal upset and headache (19, 23–25).

Dosage forms
Crude drug, and isopropyl alcohol or ethanol extracts (16). Store in a wellclosed container, protected from light and moisture.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 40–60% isopropyl alcohol or ethanol extracts of the crude drug
(18–20, 22–26, 37, 42), corresponding to 40 mg drug (27).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China (English ed.). Guangzhou, Guangdong
Science and Technology Press, 1997.
3. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 13th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of Health and
Welfare, 1996.
4. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
5. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
6. Hooker JD, Jackson BD. Index Kewensis. Vol 1. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1895.
7. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names in Latin, Arabic, Armenian,
English, French, German, Italian and Turkish languages. Cairo, Argus & Papazian Press,
1936.
8. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and
Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
9. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
10. Talalaj S, Czokowicz AS. Herbal remedies: harmful and beneficial effects. Melbourne,
Hill of Content, 1989.
11. Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant drug analysis, 2nd ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1996.
12. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
13. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.

63

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Struck D, Tegtmeier M, Harnischfeger G. Flavones in extracts of Cimicifuga racemosa.
Planta Medica, 1997, 63:289.
16. Beuscher N. Cimicifuga racemosa L.—black cohosh. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1995,
16:301–310.
17. Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Stuttgart, Gustav Fischer Verlag, 1995.
18. Daiber W. Klimakterische Beschwerden: ohne Hormone zum Erfolg! Ärztliche Praxis,
1983, 35:1946–1947.
19. Földes J. Die Wirkungen eines Extraktes aus Cimicifuga racemosa. Ärztliche Forschung,
1959, 13:623–624.
20. Lehmann-Willenbrock E, Riedel HH. Klinische und endokrinologische Untersuchungen zur Therapie ovarieller Ausfallerscheinungen nach Hysterektomie unter
Belassung der Adnexe. Zentralblatt Gynäkologie, 1988, 110:611–618.
21. Liske E, Wüstenberg P, Boblitz N. Human-pharmacological investigations during
treatment of climacteric complaints with Cimicifuga racemosa (Remifemin®): no
estrogen-like effects. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International ESCOP Symposium.
London, European Scientific Community on Phytotherapy, 1998.
22. Pethö A. Klimakterische Beschwerden. Umstellung einer Hormonbehandlung auf
ein pflanzliches Gynäkologikum möglich? Ärztliche Praxis, 1987, 38:1551–1553.
23. Stoll W. Phytotherapeutikum beeinflusst atrophisches Vaginalepithel: Doppelblindversuch Cimicifuga vs. Östrogenpräparat. Therapeutikon, 1987, 1:23–31.
24. Stolze H. Der andere Weg, klimakterische Beschwerden zu behandeln. Gyne, 1982,
1:14–16.
25. Vorberg G. Therapie klimakterischer Beschwerden. Erfolgreiche hormonfreie Therapie mit Remifemin®. Zeitschrift für Allgemeinmedizin, 1984, 60 (Suppl.):626–629.
26. Warnecke G. Influencing menopausal symptoms with a phytotherapeutic agent.
Die Medizinische Welt, 1985, 36:871–874.
27. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
28. Liske E. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of Cimicifuga racemosa for gynecological
disorders. Advances in Therapy, 1998, 15:45–53.
29. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for healthcare
professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
30. Nesselhut T et al. Untersuchungen zur proliferativen Potenz von Phytopharmaka
mit östrogenähnlicher Wirkung bei Mammakarzinomzellen. Archives of Gynecology
and Obstetrics, 1993, 253:817–818.
31. Freudenstein J, Bodinet C. Influence of an isopropanolic aqueous extract of
Cimicifugae racemosae rhizoma on the proliferation of MCF-7 cells. In: Proceedings
of the Twenty-third International LOF-Symposium of Phyto-estrogens. Ghent, 1999.
32. Elm CL et al. Medicinal botanicals: estrogenicity in rat uterus and liver. Proceedings
of the American Association for Cancer Research, 1997, 38:293.
33. Einer-Jensen N et al. Cimicifuga and Melbrosia lack oestrogenic effects in mice and
rats. Maturitas, 1996, 25:149–153.
34. Jarry H, Harnischfeger G, Düker E. Studies on the endocrine efficacy of the constituents of Cimicifuga racemosa. 2. In vitro binding of compounds to estrogen receptors. Planta Medica, 1985, 4:316–319.
35. Jarry H et al. Treatment of menopausal symptoms with extracts of Cimicifuga racemosa: in vivo and in vitro evidence for estrogenic activity. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N,
eds. Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung. Darmstadt, Steinkopff,
1995:99–112.
36. Jarry H, Harnischfeger G. Studies on the endocrine effects of the contents of
Cimicifuga racemosa. 1. Influence on the serum concentration of pituitary hormones
in ovariectomized rats. Planta Medica, 1985, 1:46–49.

64

Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae
37. Düker EM et al. Effects of extracts from Cimicifuga racemosa on gonadotropin release
in menopausal women and ovariectomized rats. Planta Medica, 1991, 57:420–424.
38. Siess M, Seybold G. Untersuchungen über die Wirkung von Pulsatilla pratensis,
Cimicifuga racemosa und Aristolochia clematitis auf den Östrus infantiler und kastrierter
weisser Mäuse. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1960, 10:514–520.
39. Jarry H et al. Organ-specific effects of Cimicifuga racemosa (CR) in brain and uterus.
In: Proceedings of the Twenty-third International LOF-Symposium of Phyto-estrogens.
Ghent, 1999.
40. Benoit PS et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants. XIV. Antiinflammatory evaluation of 163 species of plants. Lloydia, 1976, 39:160–171.
41. Liske E, Wüstenberg P. Efficacy and safety of phytomedicines with particular
reference to Cimicifuga racemosa. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 1998,
81 (Suppl. 1):S108.
42. Liske E, Wüstenberg P. Therapy of climacteric complaints with Cimicifuga racemosa:
herbal medicine with clinically proven evidence [Abstract]. Menopause, 1998, 5:250.
43. Lieberman S. A review of the effectiveness of Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh) for
the symptoms of menopause. Journal of Women’s Health, 1998, 7:525–529.
44. Görlich N. Behandlung ovarieller Störungen in der Allgemeinpraxis. Ärztliche Praxis,
1962, 14:1742–1743.
45. Heizer H. Kritisches zur Cimicifuga-Therapie bei hormonalen Störungen der Frau.
Medizinische Klinik, 1960, 55:232–233.
46. Schotten EW. Erfahrungen mit dem Cimicifuga-Präparat Remifemin. Der Landarzt,
1958, 11:353–354.
47. Starfinger W. Therapie mit östrogenwirksamen Pflanzenextrakten. Medizin Heute,
1960, 9:173–174.
48. Stiehler K. Über die Anwendung eines standardisierten Cimicifuga-Auszuges in der
Gynäkologie. Ärztliche Praxis, 1959, 26:916–917.
49. Fukunishi K et al. Teratology study of hochu-ekki-to in rats. Pharmacometrics, 1997,
53:293–297.
50. Sakaguchi Y et al. Teratology study of otsuji-to in rats. Pharmacometrics, 1997,
53:287–292.

65

Folium cum Flore Crataegi

Definition
Folium cum Flore Crataegi consists of the dried flower-bearing branches of
Crataegus monogyna Jacq. (Lindm), C. laevigata (Poir.) DC, their hybrids or, more
rarely, other Crataegus species (Rosaceae).1

Synonyms
Crataegus monogyna Jacq. (Lindm): C. apiifolia Medik. non Michx., C. oxyacantha L. ssp. monogyna Lev., Mespilus elegans Poir., M. monogyna All., M. monogyna
Ehrh. (3).
Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC: C. oxyacantha L., C. oxyacantha L. ssp. polygala
Lev., C. oxyacanthoides Thuill, Mespilus oxyacantha (Gartn.) Crantz. (1, 3, 4).

Selected vernacular names
Aubeline, aubepine, biancospino, calabrice, calavrice, eenarijlige meidorn, eenstijlige meidorn, eingriffeliger Weissdorn, Einkern-Weissdorn, épine blanche,
espinero, espino blanco, espino majuelo, galagonya virágzó ágvég, hagdorn,
hagedorn, harthorne, haw, hawthorn, hedge thorn, majuelo, may, May thorn,
Mehlbeerbaum, Mehldorn, seiyosanzashi, shanzha, sorkh valik, spina, Stumpf
gelappter Weissdorn, Weissdorn, whitethorn, za bur, zu’rurr el awdiyah,
zweigriffeliger Weissdorn, Zweikern-Weissdorn (1, 3, 5–8).

Geographical distribution
Common to the temperate areas of the northern hemisphere, including eastern
areas of North America, parts of South America, east Asia and Europe (9, 10).

Description
Crataegus monogyna: a thorny shrub; leaves bright green with 3 or 5 acute lobes,
deeper and further apart than those of C. laevigata. Flowers, grouped into
1

Fructus Crataegi is included in the European pharmacopoeia (1) and in the pharmacopoeia of
the People’s Republic of China (2). However, clinical and pharmacological data for this plant part
are insufficient to justify monographing at this time.

66

Folium cum Flore Crataegi
branchy corymbs, have 5 triangular sepals, 5 white petals, and an androecium
of 15–20 stamens inserted on the edge of a monocarpellate, brownish-green
receptacle; floral peduncles and sepals pubescent, stamen with black anthers
and 1 style (1, 9).
Crataegus laevigata: a thorny shrub; twigs glabrescent, brown; leaves bright
green, obovate, with 3, 5 or 7 shallow, obtuse lobes. Flowers, grouped into
branchy corymbs, have 5 triangular sepals, 5 white petals, and an androecium
of 15–20 stamens inserted on the edge of a bi- or tricarpellate receptacle; floral
peduncles and sepals glabrous, stamens with red anthers and 2–3 styles; fruits
deep red, globose or ellipsoid (9, 11).

Plant material of interest: dried leaf with flower
General appearance
Crataegus monogyna: leaves bright green with 3 or 5 acute lobes, deeper and
further apart than those of C. laevigata, with secondary venation curved outwards. Flowers, grouped into branchy corymbs, have 5 triangular sepals, 5
white petals, and an androecium of 15–20 stamens inserted on the edge of a
monocarpellate, brownish-green receptacle; floral peduncles and sepals pubescent, anthers black with 1 style; sepals lanceolate, acuminate, falling over the
ovary after flowering (1, 9).
Crataegus laevigata: leaves bright green with 3, 5 or 7 shallow, obtuse, converging lobes, with secondary venation curved inward. Flowers, grouped into
branchy corymbs, have 5 triangular sepals, 5 white petals, and an androecium
of 15–20 stamens inserted on the edge of a bi- or tricarpellate receptacle; floral
peduncles and sepals glabrous, stamens with red anthers and 2–3 styles.

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic, faint; taste: slightly bitter-sweet, astringent (12–15).

Microscopic characteristics
Leaf dorsoventral; cells of upper epidermis polygonal, straight-walled with striated cuticle, those of lower epidermis more sinuous; anomocytic stomata on
lower epidermis only; covering trichomes on both epidermises but more
numerous on the lower, which are long, tapering, unicellular or very occasionally uniseriate with 2 cells, walls moderately thickened; cluster crystals or
groups of small prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate in the cells along the veins.
Epidermis of floral pedicel and receptacle contain abundant covering trichomes
similar to those on the leaf, but longer and more undulating; calyx with numerous anomocytic stomata on the outer epidermis, inner epidermis with a striated cuticle; epidermal cells of corolla distinctly papillose; fibrous layer of anther
with characteristic thickenings; pollen grains spherical to elliptical, up to 45 mm
in diameter, with 3 germinal pores and faintly granular exine. Epidermal cells
67

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
of stem have thickened anticlinal outer walls; cortex parenchymatous with prismatic and cluster crystals of calcium oxalate; dense groups of small, tightly
packed pericyclic fibres with much thickened and lignified walls; xylem completely lignified, composed of scattered vessels, thick-walled fibres and
parenchyma separated by distinct medullary rays containing brown-coloured
matter; larger vessels with bordered pits, smaller elements with annular or
spiral thickening; central pith parenchymatous and lignified, cells with moderately thickened walls and numerous pits (12, 15).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-green. Unicellular covering trichomes, usually with a thick wall and
wide lumen, almost straight or slightly curved, pitted at the base; fragments of
leaf epidermis with cells which have sinuous to polygonal anticlinal walls and
large anomocytic stomata surrounded by 4–7 subsidiary cells; parenchymatous
cells of mesophyll containing cluster crystals of calcium oxalate, usually 10–
20 mm in diameter; cells associated with veins contain groups of small prismatic crystals. Petal fragments showing rounded polygonal epidermal cells,
strongly papillose, thick walls with clearly visible wavy striations in the cuticle;
anther fragments showing endothecium with an arched and regularly thickened
margin. Stem fragments containing collenchymatous cells, bordered, pitted
vessels and groups of lignified sclerenchymatous fibres with narrow lumina.
Numerous spherical to elliptical or triangular pollen grains up to 45 mm in
diameter, with 3 germinal pores and a faintly granular exine (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, thin-layer chromatography (1, 7),
and microchemical test for the presence of procyanidins (7).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (16).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 8% lignified branches with a diameter greater than 2.5 mm (1)
and not more than 2% other foreign matter (1, 15).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (1).
68

Folium cum Flore Crataegi

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (17). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (17), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (16) and
pesticide residues (18).

Other purity tests
Chemical, acid-insoluble ash, sulfated ash, water-soluble extractive and
alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in accordance with national
requirements.

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (16).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (16) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 1.5% of flavonoids, calculated as hyperoside (1), and not
less than 0.6% of flavone C-glycosides, calculated as vitexin (14), determined
by spectrophotometry at 410 and 336 nm, respectively (1). A high-performance
liquid chromatography method is also available (19).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are flavonoids (rutin, hyperoside, vitexin, vitexin-2≤
rhamnoside, acetylvitexin-2≤ rhamnoside) and related proanthocyanidins (19,
20). In the inflorescence, flavonol glycosides, mainly in the form of
hyperoside, spiraeoside and rutin, are present. The primary flavonoid
derivatives in the leaves are epi-catechin (epi-catechol) and/or catechin (catechol), and the related procyanidins formed during condensation of 2–8
monomeric units of the above catechins (19–22), together with oligomeric
procyanidins (23). The presence of simple phenolic acids (e.g. chlorogenic and
caffeic acids) has also been reported. Of the non-phenolic constituents, pentacyclic triterpenes (e.g. ursolic and oleanolic acids) and the 2-a-hydroxy derivative of oleanolic acid, known as crataegolic acid, are among the characteristic
components (4). The structures of the characteristic constituents are presented
below.
69

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
O

OH
O
HO

R

O

O
HO

O
OH

OH

O

HO

X

hyperoside

R

X

H

Gal

vitexin 2≤-rhamnoside
R = Rha

O
OH
HO

spiraeoside Glc

H

O

rutin

Rha-Glc

R

H

HO

HO
HO

HO

O

Rha =

OH

Gal =

vitexin
R=H

OH

O

CH3
HO

OH

HO

OH

OH
b-D-glucopyranosyl

O O

HO

OH

Glc =

a-L-rhamnopyranosyl =
6-deoxy-a-L-mannopyranosyl

b-D-galactopyranosyl

OH

CH3
Rha-Glc =

O

OH

O

HO HO
HO

OH

HO

O

R
R'

OH
6-deoxy-a-L-mannopyranosyl-(1
b-D-glucopyranosyl

H

6)-

R

R¢

catechin
(catechol)

OH

H

epi-catechin
(epi-catechol)

H

OH

OH

OH
OH
HO

O 2
4
OH
HO

H

OH

3 OH

OH

O 2'
H
3' OH
OH

70

procyanidin

2

2¢

3

3¢

4

B1

a-(R )

a-(R )

a-(R )

b-(S )

b-(R )

B2

a-(R )

a-(R )

a-(R )

a-(R )

b-(R )

B3

a-(R )

a-(R )

b-(S )

b-(S )

a-(S )

B4

a-(R )

a-(R )

b-(S )

a-(R )

a-(S )

Folium cum Flore Crataegi

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Treatment of chronic congestive heart failure stage II, as defined by the New
York Heart Association (24–34).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Support of cardiac and circulatory functions (35).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
As an antispasmodic agent in the treatment of asthma, diarrhoea, gall bladder
disease and uterine contractions, and as a sedative for the treatment of
insomnia (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Inotropic effects
Positive inotropic effects of Folium cum Flore Crataegi and its constituents have
been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo. These effects are generally attributed to the flavonoid and procyanidin constituents of the leaves with flowers
(3, 36–38). A hydroalcoholic extract of the flowers with leaves, flavonoid and
procyanidin fractions of the extract, and isolated constituents (e.g. biogenic
amines, crataegolic acid, epi-catechin, hyperoside, luteolin 7-glucoside, rutin
and vitexin) all have positive inotropic effects, and prolong the refractory period
in cardiac myocytes, isolated papillary muscles and isolated guinea-pig hearts
(36–48). In isolated guinea-pig hearts perfused at constant pressure, 3 mg/ml of
a standardized extract increased the contractility of the heart by 9.5% (40).
In isolated, electrically stimulated strips of failing human left ventricular
myocardium, a standardized extract (18.75% oligomeric procyanidins)
increased the force of contraction at concentrations higher than 10 mg/ml; a
100 mg/ml extract improved the force–frequency relationship (39). A standardized extract of the leaves and flowers increased the contractility of myocardial
cells by 153%, at a concentration of 120 mg/ml (44). An aqueous extract of the
leaves with flowers, two proanthocyanidin fractions and two flavonoid fractions of the extract dilated coronary blood vessels, and had positive inotropic
effects on isolated guinea-pig hearts (extract or fraction: 0.05 mg/ml) (41).
Chronotropic effects
Intragastric administration of a macerate or fluidextract of the shoots, flowers
or leaves to rats (12.5–25.0 mg/kg body weight) significantly inhibited arrhythmias induced by aconitine, calcium chloride or chloroform/epinephrine
71

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
(P < 0.05) (49, 50). The extracts also reduced blood pressure in rats at the same
dosage (49, 50). Aconitine-induced arrythmias were also inhibited after intravenous administration of a 95% ethanol extract of the bark and leaves
(50 mg/kg body weight) to rabbits (51). Intravenous administration of a
flavonoid-enriched extract of the leaves and flowers to rabbits (20 mg/kg body
weight) or rats (2 mg/kg body weight) inhibited barium chloride-induced
arrhythmias (52, 53). Intravenous administration of a standardized extract
(containing 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins) to anaesthetized dogs (7.5–
30.0 mg/kg body weight) increased maximum left ventricular contraction
velocity by 16.8–31.1% (54).
An aqueous extract improved cardiac performance during reperfusion,
reduced lactate levels and accelerated energy metabolism in reperfused
ischaemic rat heart. No increase in coronary blood flow was observed (55).
Intragastric administration of single doses of a standardized extract (containing
18.75% oligomeric procyanidins) of the leaves with flowers (100 mg/kg body
weight) or an oligomeric procyanidin-enriched fraction (20 mg/kg body weight)
daily to rats protected against perfusion-induced arrhythmias, hypotensive
crisis and mortality (56, 57). The oligomeric procyanidin-enriched fraction
did not decrease the reperfusion-induced elevation of creatine kinase plasma
levels (57). Administration of powdered leaves and flowers to rats (2% of diet)
reduced the release of lactate dehydrogenase after perfusion-induced heart
ischemia (58).
Effect on coronary blood flow
Intragastric administration of an oligomeric procyanidin fraction of a standardized leaf and flower extract to dogs at a dose of 12–70 mg/kg body weight,
three times daily for 60 days, increased myocardial blood flow (59, 60). Intravenous injection of an aqueous or 95% ethanol extract of the flowers increased
coronary blood flow and cardiac output, and decreased peripheral resistance in
both dogs and guinea-pigs (61–63). Administration of a flavonoid-enriched
extract to cats and rabbits increased coronary blood flow by 48% and 163%,
respectively, and reduced pituitrin-induced coronary insufficiency in rabbits
(52). Intravenous administration of a leaf with flower extract to cats (10 mg/kg
body weight) or rabbits (20 mg/kg body weight) dilated coronary blood vessels,
and improved coronary blood flow (53).
Effect on action potential
A leaf preparation (10 mg/l) prolonged the duration of the action potential and
delayed the recovery of Vmax in isolated guinea-pig papillary muscle (42). The
electrophysiological correlation between the increase in the contraction amplitude of isolated canine papillary muscles, and vasodilation in isolated human
coronary arteries, was measured after application of an extract of the leaves
with flowers. The cardiac action potential significantly increased in duration
and overshoot, and maximal depolarization (P < 0.001). Hyperpolarization of
72

Folium cum Flore Crataegi
the resting membrane of normal and arteriosclerotic vascular smooth muscle
cells of the human coronary artery was observed after treatment with flavonoids isolated from the extract (0.1 and 100 mmol/l). The isometric wall tension decreased in both normal and arteriosclerotic vessels. The increase of
peak-to-plateau repolarization in cardiac action potential and hyperpolarization
of vascular smooth muscle suggest that the extract acts as a potassium channel
agonist (64, 65).
Antihypertensive effects
In various animal models, a decrease in peripheral vascular resistance and
hypertension occurred after treatment with leaf and/or flower extracts (50, 54,
66–69). Intravenous administration of a standardized fluidextract of the leaves
with flowers (equivalent to 6 mg of procyanidins/kg body weight) to anaesthetized normotensive dogs decreased norepinephrine-induced elevation of
blood pressure. The extract (equivalent to 0.03 mg procyanidins/ml) also had
b-blocking activity and inhibited epinephrine-induced tachycardia in isolated
frog hearts (69). Hyperoside, isolated from an extract of the leaves and flowers,
administered either intravenously at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight or by infusion at 0.1 mg/kg body weight/min for 30 min, decreased blood pressure in
anaesthetized dogs (68). Intravenous administration of an aqueous extract of
the leaves (average dose 31 mg/kg body weight) decreased the systolic, diastolic and mean blood pressure in normotensive anaesthetized rats (66). Acute
or chronic intragastric administration of a fluidextract or a glycerol/ethanol
extract reduced arterial blood pressure in normotensive rats and in rats with
desoxycorticosterone acetate-induced hypertension (50). Intragastric administration of a standardized extract (300 mg/kg body weight daily) decreased blood
pressure by 9 mm Hg (1.20 kPa) (67). Intravenous administration of a standardized extract (containing 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins) to anaesthetized rats
(30 mg/kg body weight) or dogs (15 mg/kg body weight) decreased total peripheral resistance and arterial blood pressure (54).
Anti-inflammatory effects
Both free radical production and lipid peroxidation are involved in various
pathological processes, including cardiac ischaemia. As determined by in vitro
studies, Folium cum Flore Crataegi has free radical scavenging and antioxidant
activities. A standardized extract (containing 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins)
and an oligomeric procyanidin-fraction of the extract inhibited lipid peroxidation (IC50 0.48 mg/ml (extract), 0.3 mg/ml (fraction)), and the activity of human
neutrophil elastase (IC50 4.75 mg/ml (extract), 0.84 mg/ml (fraction)) (56). A 70%
methanol extract of the flower buds inhibited lipid peroxidation in rat liver
microsomes (IC50 23 mg/l) (70, 71). Both phenolic and flavonoid-enriched fractions of extracts of the leaves and flowers had antioxidant activity in vitro
(70–72).
73

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Effect on signal transduction
An aqueous or methanol extract of the leaves with flowers, as well as hyperoside, vitexin and vitexin rhamnoside, inhibited the activity of cyclic AMPdependent phosphodiesterase isolated from guinea-pig or rat heart (73, 74).
Both luteolin 7-glucoside and rutin were also active (75). Hydroalcoholic
extracts of the flowers and flower heads inhibited the formation of thromboxane A2 and prostaglandin I2 in rabbit cardiac tissues in vitro, thus indicating an
anti-inflammatory effect of the extracts (76, 77). A standardized extract (containing 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins) displaced 3H-ouabain bound to
sodium- and potassium-activated adenosine triphosphatase (39).
Anticontractile effects
An aqueous extract of the flowers inhibited barium chloride-induced contractions in rabbit intestine in vitro (78). A flavonoid-enriched extract of the leaves
with flowers inhibited both histamine- and nicotine-induced contractions in
rabbit intestine in vitro and partially inhibited contractions induced by barium
chloride, acetylcholine or serotonin (ED50 0.02 mg/ml) (52). Intravenous administration of a flavonoid-enriched extract of the leaves with flowers to cats
(20 mg/kg body weight) inhibited contractions in intestinal smooth muscle, and
intraperitoneal injection (400 mg/kg body weight) inhibited acetic acid-induced
writhing in mice (52).
Sedative effects
Sedative effects have been observed in various animal models after intragastric
administration of leaf with flower extracts (79, 80). A 60% ethanol extract of
the flowers increased hexobarbital-induced sleeping times, and decreased spontaneous motility and exploratory behaviour in female mice (800 mg/kg body
weight) (80).
Diuretic effects
A flavonoid-enriched fraction of a flower extract had diuretic activity in dogs
(50 mg/kg body weight) (81).
Toxicology
Single-dose toxicity studies have demonstrated that rats and mice tolerate
3 g/kg body weight, by gastric lavage, of a standardized hydroalcoholic extract
of the leaves with flowers (containing 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins)
without any clinical symptoms of toxicity. The intraperitoneal median
lethal dose (LD50) was 1.17 g/kg body weight in rats and 750 mg/kg body weight
in mice. No toxic effects were observed in a repeat-dose toxicity study in which
rats and dogs were given a standardized extract (containing 18.75% oligomeric
procyanidins) at doses of 30, 90 and 300 mg/kg body weight daily by the intragastric route for 26 weeks (82).
74

Folium cum Flore Crataegi

Clinical pharmacology
Cardiac insufficiency
Review of the pharmacological and clinical data indicates that standardized
extracts of Folium cum Flore Crataegi increase myocardial performance,
improve myocardial circulatory perfusion and tolerance in cases of oxygen deficiency, have antiarrhythmic effects and reduce afterload (29). Positive therapeutic effects of Folium cum Flore Crataegi in patients with characteristic
symptoms of an activated sympathoadrenergic system, such as hypertension,
tachycardia and arrhythmia (also characteristic of cardiac insufficiency stage II,
as defined by the New York Heart Association (25–34)), have also been demonstrated (30). Furthermore, numerous clinical trials with and without controls
have assessed the therapeutic efficacy of Folium cum Flore Crataegi extracts for
the treatment of cardiac insufficiency stage II (25–34). The investigations were
performed with a dried 70% methanol or 45% ethanol standardized extract
(containing 2.2% flavonoids or 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins, respectively)
of the leaves with flowers (30). The dosage ranged from 160 to 900 mg extract
daily for 4–8 weeks. Evaluation of efficacy of the extracts was based on the following criteria: anaerobic threshold (27); Clinical Global Impression Scale (31,
32); exercise tolerance (25, 26, 28, 31, 32, 34); ventricular ejection fraction (26,
33); quality of life and improvement of subjective symptoms (defined by the
New York Heart Association) (26–28, 31–34) and pressure/rate product (26, 28,
31, 32, 34). Although improvements were seen, no long-term trials have
assessed the effects of Folium Cum Flore Crataegi on mortality rates in patients
with chronic congestive heart failure.
Exercise tolerance
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the efficacy of
the extract containing 2.2% flavonoids on exercise-induced anaerobic threshold, as measured by spiroergometry, in 72 patients. Patients were administered
an oral dose of 900 mg extract or placebo daily for 8 weeks. After treatment,
oxygen uptake increased significantly in the treated group (P < 0.05), and exercise time to anaerobic threshold increased by 30 seconds in the treated group,
but by only 2 seconds in the placebo group. Significant improvements in subjective symptoms were also noted in the treated group, as compared with the
placebo group (P < 0.01) (27).
The efficacy of the extract containing 2.2% flavonoids on the improvement
of exercise tolerance was assessed by bicycle ergometry in patients with cardiac
insufficiency stage II, in three clinical trials. In a double-blind, placebocontrolled trial of 85 patients, oral administration of 300 mg extract daily for
4–8 weeks improved working capacity; however, the difference was not significant when compared with the placebo (25). A double-blind, placebocontrolled trial assessed the efficacy of oral administration of 600 mg extract
daily for 8 weeks in 78 patients. Patients in the treatment group had a significant improvement in exercise tolerance as compared with the placebo group
75

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
(P < 0.001). Patients who received the extract also had lower blood pressure
and heart rate during exercise, and had fewer overall symptoms, such as dyspnoea and fatigue (31). In the third trial, 132 patients were treated orally with
900 mg extract or 37.5 mg captopril daily for 8 weeks in a double-blind comparative study. Exercise tolerance, measured after 56 days of treatment,
improved significantly in both groups (P < 0.001). In addition, the pressure/rate
product was reduced, and the incidence and severity of symptoms such as dyspnoea and fatigue decreased by approximately 50% (32).
Pressure/rate product
Two double-blind, placebo-controlled trials assessed the efficacy of the extract containing 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins in a total of 156 patients with
stage II cardiac insufficiency. Patients were treated orally with 160 mg extract
or placebo daily for 8 weeks. The main parameters measured were the
pressure/rate product using a bicycle ergometer, and the score of subjective symptom status. Patients treated with the extract exhibited a significant improvement in exercise tolerance, as compared with the placebo group
(P < 0.05), and also a decrease in subjective complaints (28, 34). In addition, a
slight reduction in the systolic and diastolic blood pressure was noted in both
groups (28).
Ventricular ejection fraction
In a trial without controls involving seven patients with stages II and III cardiac
insufficiency, with an angiographically determined left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 55% over a period of 4 weeks, oral administration of 240 mg
extract containing 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins daily for 4 weeks increased
the ventricular ejection fraction from 29.80 to 40.45%, as measured by angiography. Symptomatic complaints (Complaint List as defined by von Zerssen)
also showed improvements (33). The effects of the extract containing 18.75%
oligomeric procyanidins on haemodynamics were also investigated by radionuclide angiocardiography in a study without controls. Twenty patients with
stage II cardiac insufficiency, with an angiographically determined left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 55% over a period of 4 weeks, were treated
with 480 mg extract. After treatment, the ejection fraction increased from 40.18
to 43.50% at rest, and from 41.51 to 46.56% under exercise conditions. Ergometric tolerance to exercise improved, blood pressure decreased and subjective
complaints were reduced (26).

Pharmacokinetics
Absorption of a 14C-labelled oligomeric procyanidin fraction of standardized
extracts of leaves with flowers was measured in mice after intragastric administration (0.6 mg). The results demonstrated that 20–30% of the total fraction,
40–81% of the trimeric procyanidins and 16–42% of the oligomeric procyani-

76

Folium cum Flore Crataegi
dins were absorbed within 1–7 hours after administration. After 7 hours, 0.6%
of the radioactivity of the total fraction was eliminated by expiration and 6.4%
was eliminated in the urine. Daily intragastric administration of 0.6 mg of a
radiolabelled oligomeric procyanidin fraction to mice for 7 days led to an accumulation of radioactivity that was 2–3 times that in mice given a single dose
(83).

Contraindications
None (84).

Warnings
Accurate diagnosis of stage II congestive heart failure should be obtained prior
to use of Folium cum Flore Crataegi. Consult a physician if symptoms worsen,
remain unchanged for longer than 6 weeks, or if water accumulates in the legs.
Medical attention is absolutely necessary if pain occurs in the region of the
heart, spreading out to the arms, upper abdomen or neck area, or in cases of
respiratory distress (e.g. dyspnoea) (84).

Precautions
Drug interactions
None (84).

Drug and laboratory test interactions
No effects in laboratory tests (i.e. serum levels of sodium chloride, potassium
chloride, calcium chloride, serum glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase, serum
glutamate pyruvate transaminase, g-glutamyl transpeptidase, total bilirubin,
cholesterol and creatinin, and blood glucose levels) were observed (34).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A standardized extract of Folium cum Flore Crataegi (containing 18.75%
oligomeric procyanidins) was not mutagenic or clastogenic in the Salmonella/microsome assay, mouse lymphoma test, cytogenetic analysis in cultured
human lymphocytes or in the mouse bone marrow micronucleus test (82). A
fluidextract was moderately active in the Salmonella/microsome assay in S.
typhimurium strain TA98 only after metabolic activation. The mutagenic activity appeared to be due to the quercetin content of the extract; however, the
amount of quercetin ingested in a normal daily diet is higher than would be
obtained from the extract (85). Intragastric administration of up to 1.6 g/kg body
weight had no effect on the fertility of female and male rats or the F1 generation (86).

77

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Intragastric administration of up to 1.6 g/kg body weight of a standardized
extract of Folium cum Flore Crataegi to rats and rabbits was not teratogenic
(86).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
No peri- or postnatal toxicity was observed in rats treated intragastrically with
a standardized extract of Folium cum Flore Crataegi (1.6 g/kg body weight) (86).

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
nursing mothers or paediatric use. Therefore, Folium cum Flore Crataegi should
not be administered during lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
None (84).

Dosage forms
Crude drug for infusion and hydroalcoholic extracts (35). Store in a well-closed
container, protected from light and moisture (1).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 160–900 mg dried 45% ethanol or 70% methanol extract (drug:
extract ratio 4–7 : 1) standardized to contain 18.75% oligomeric procyanidins
(calculated as epi-catechin) or 2.2% flavonoids (calculated as hyperoside),
respectively (26–29, 31–34, 84); 1.0–1.5 g comminuted crude drug as an infusion 3–4 times daily (35). Therapeutic effects may require 4–6 weeks of
continuous therapy (84).

References
1. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe,
1999.
2. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Beijing, Chemical
Industry Press, 1997.
3. Hänsel R et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Bd. 4: Drogen A–D,
5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1994.
4. Steinegger E, Hänsel R. Pharmakognosie. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1996:580–584.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).

78

Folium cum Flore Crataegi
6. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for healthcare professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
7. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
8. Ahumada C. The effects of a triterpene fraction isolated from Crataegus monogyna
Jacq. on different acute inflammation models in rats and mice. Leucocyte migration
and phospholipase A2 inhibition. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1997,
49:329–331.
9. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
10. Pizarro CM. Sinopsis de la Flora Chilena. Santiago, Ediciones de la Universidad de
Chile, 1966.
11. Tutin TG, ed. Flora Europea. Vol. 4. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1976.
12. Deutsches Arzneibuch. Stuttgart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 1998.
13. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
14. Pharmacopoea helvetica, 8th ed. Berne, Département fédéral de l’intérieur, 1997.
15. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
16. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
17. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
18. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
19. Rehwald A, Meier B, Sticher O. Qualitative and quantitative reversed-phase highperformance liquid chromatography of flavonoids in Crataegus leaves and flowers.
Journal of Chromatography A, 1994, 677:25–33.
20. Krawczyk U, Pteri G, Kery A. HPLC analysis of procyanidins in Crataegus extract.
Archive der Pharmazie, 1991, 324:97–99.
21. Ficarra P et al. High-performance liquid chromatography and diffuse reflectance
spectroscopy of flavonoids in Crataegus oxycantha L. III. Analysis of 2-phenylchroman derivatives and caffeic acid. Il Farmaco, 1990, 45:237–255.
22. Kolodziej H, Ferreira D, Roux DG. Synthesis of condensed tannins. Part 12. Direct
access to [4,6]- and [4,8]-all-2,3-cis procyanidin derivatives from (-)-epicathechin:
assessment of bonding positions in oligomeric analogues from Crataegus oxycantha
L. Journal of the Chemical Society Perkin Transactions I, 1984:343–350.
23. Thompson RS et al. Plant proanthocyanidins. Part 1. Introduction: the isolation,
structure, and distribution in nature of plant procyanidins. Journal of the Chemical
Society Perkin Transactions I, 1972:1387–1399.
24. American Heart Association Medical/Scientific Statement. 1994 revisions to classification of functional capacity and objective assessment of patients with heart
diseases. Circulation, 1994, 90:644–645.
25. Bödigheimer K, Chase D. Wirksamkeit von Weissdorn-Extrakt in der Dosierung 3
¥ 100 mg täglich. Multizentrische Doppelblind-Studie mit 85 herzinsuffizienten
Patienten im Stadium NYHA II. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1994, 136
(Suppl. 1):18–21.
26. Eichstädt H et al. Crataegus-Extrakt hilft dem Patienten mit NYHA-II Herzinsuffizienz. Untersuchung der myokardialen und hämodynamischen Wirkung eines
standardisierten Crataegus-Präparates mit Hilfe computergestützter Radionuklidventrikulographie. Therapiewoche, 1989, 39:3288–3296.
27. Förster A et al. Crataegus bei mässig reduzierter linksventrikulärer Auswurffraktion.
Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1994, 136 (Suppl. 1):21–26.
28. Leuchtgens H. Crataegus-Spezialextrakt WS 1442 bei Herzinsuffizienz NYHA II.
Fortschritte der Medizin, 1993, 111:352–354.
29. Loew D. Crataegus-Spezialextrakte bei Herzinsuffizienz. Gesicherte pharmakologische und klinische Ergebnisse. Der Kassenarzt, 1994, 15:43–52.
30. Loew D. Phytotherapy in heart failure. Phytomedicine, 1997, 4:267–271.

79

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
31. Schmidt U et al. Effect of hawthorne (Crataegus) preparation LI 132 in 78 patients
with chronic congestive heart failure defined as NYHA functional class II. Phytomedicine, 1994, 1:17–24.
32. Tauchert M et al. Wirksamkeit des Weissdorn-Extraktes LI 132 im Vergleich mit
Captopril. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1994, 136 (Suppl. 1):27–33.
33. Weikl A, Noh HS. Der Einfluss von Crataegus bei globaler Herzinsuffizienz. Herz
und Gefässe, 1992:516–524.
34. Weikl A et al. Crataegus-Spezialextrakt WS 1442. Fortschritte der Medizin, 1996,
114:291–296.
35. Wichtl M. Crataegi folium cum flore. In: Wichtl, M ed. Teedrogen und Phytopharmaka, 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1997:168–172.
36. Ammon HPT, Kaul R. Crataegus, Herz-Kreislauf-Wirkungen von Crataegusextrakten, Flavonoiden und Procyanidinen. Teil 1: Historisches und Wirkstoffe. Deutsche
Apotheker Zeitung, 1994, 134:2433–2436.
37. Ammon HPT, Kaul R. Crataegus, Herz-Kreislauf-Wirkungen von Crataegusextrakten, Flavonoiden und Procyanidinen. Teil 2: Wirkungen auf das Herz. Deutsche
Apotheker Zeitung, 1994, 134:2521–2535.
38. Ammon HPT, Kaul R. Crataegus, Herz-Kreislauf-Wirkungen von Crataegusextrakten, Flavonoiden und Procyanidinen. Teil 3: Wirkungen auf den Kreislauf. Deutsche
Apotheker Zeitung, 1994, 134:2631–2636.
39. Brixius K et al. WS 1442 (Crataegus-Spezialextrakt) wirkt am insuffizienten menschlichen Myokard Kontraktionskraft-steigernd. Herz Kreislauf, 1998, 30:28–33.
40. Joseph G, Zhao Y, Klaus W. Comparative studies on the effect of Crataegus extract
and different positive inotropic substances on the effective refractory period of
ventricular myocardium. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology, 1995,
351:R103.
41. Leukel A et al. Studies on the activity of Crataegus compounds upon the isolated
guinea-pig heart. Planta Medica, 1986, 53:545–546.
42. Müller A et al. Crataegus extract prolongs action potential duration in guinea-pig
papillary muscle. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:257–261.
43. Occhiuto F et al. Étude comparée de l’activité cardiovasculaire des jeunes pousses,
des feuilles et des fleurs de Crataegus oxyacantha L. II. Action de préparations extractives et de principes actifs pur isolés sur le coeur isolés de lapin. Plantes médicinales
et Phytothérapie, 1986, 20:52–63.
44. Pöpping S et al. Crataegus-Wirkung auf Kontraktion und O2-Verbrauch isolierter
Herzzellen. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1994, 136 (Suppl. 1):39–46.
45. Pöpping S et al. Effect of a hawthorn extract on contraction and energy turnover of
isolated rat cardiomyocytes. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1995, 45:1157–1161.
46. Schüssler M et al. Effects of flavonoids from Crataegus species in Langendorff
perfused isolated guinea pig hearts. Planta Medica, 1992, 58 (Suppl. 1):A646–
A647.
47. Schüssler M et al. Myocardial effects of flavonoids from Crataegus species. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1995, 45:842–845.
48. Wagner H, Grevel J. Herzwirksame Drogen IV; Kardiotone Amine aus Crataegus
oxyacantha. Planta Medica, 1982, 45:98–101.
49. Costa R et al. Étude comparée de l’activité cardiovasculaire des jeunes pousses, des
feuilles et des fleurs de Crataegus oxyacantha L. III. Action protectrice sur le coeur
isolés de rat vis-à-vis des agents arythmogènes et dans les arythmies par reperfusions. Plantes médicinales et Phytothérapie, 1986, 20:115–128.
50. Occhiuto F et al. Étude comparée de l’activité cardiovasculaire des jeunes pousses,
des feuilles et des fleurs de Crataegus oxyacantha L. I. Activité electrique et tension
arterielle chez le rat. Plantes médicinales et Phytothérapie, 1986, 20:37–51.
51. Thompson EB et al. Preliminary study of potential antiarrhythmic effects of Crataegus monogyna. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1974, 63:1936–1937.

80

Folium cum Flore Crataegi
52. Manolov P, Nikolov KT. Crataemon experimental and clinical studies. Bulletin
Pharmachim, 1969, 1:1.
53. Petkov V, Manolov P. Pharmacological studies on substances of plant origin with
coronary dilating and antiarrhythmic action. Comparative Medicine East and West,
1978, 6:123–130.
54. Gabard B, Trunzler G. Zur Pharmakologie von Crataegus. In: Reitbrock N et al., eds.
Wandlungen in der Therapie der Herzinsuffizienz. Braunschweig, Friedrich Vieweg und
Sohn, 1983:43–53.
55. Nasa Y et al. Protective effect of Crataegus extract on the cardiac mechanical
dysfunction in isolated perfused working rat heart. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1993,
43:945–949.
56. Chatterjee SS et al. In vitro und in vivo-Untersuchungen zur kardioprotektiven
Wirkung von oligomeren Procyanidinen in einem Crataegus-Extrakt aus Blättern mit
Blüten. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1997, 47:821–825.
57. Krzeminski T, Chatterjee SS. Ischemia and early reperfusion-induced arrhythmias:
beneficial effects of an extract of Crataegus oxyacantha L. Pharmacy and Pharmacological Letters, 1993, 3:45–48.
58. Makdessi SA et al. Myocardial protection by pretreatment with Crataegus
oxyacantha. An assessment by means of the release of lactate dehydrogenase by the
ischemic and reperfused Langendorff heart. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1996, 46:25–
27.
59. Mävers WH, Hensel H. Veränderungen der lokalen Myokarddurchblutung nach
oraler Gabe eines Crataegus-Extraktes bei nichtnarkotisierten Hunden. ArzneimittelForschung, 1974, 24:783–785.
60. Roddewig C, Hensel H. Reaktion der lokalen Myokarddurchblutung von wachen
Hunden und narkotisierten Katzen auf orale und parenterale Applikation einer
Crataegus Fraktion (oligomere Procyanidine). Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1977, 27:1407–
1410.
61. Hockerts T, Mülke G. Beitrag zur Frage einer Coronarwirkung von wässrigen
Extrakten aus Crataegus-Droge. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1955, 5:755–757.
62. Jacobi H et al. Studies on the coronary effect of Crataegus extracts. ArzneimittelForschung, 1956, 6:98–99.
63. Kovach AGB et al. Effects of an extract from Crataegus oxyacantha on coronary blood
flow in dogs. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1958, 9:378–379.
64. Siegel G et al. Weissdorn-Extrakt LI 132. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1994,
136 (Suppl. 1):47–56.
65. Siegel G et al. Molecular physiological effector mechanisms of hawthorn extract in
cardiac papillary muscle and coronary vascular smooth muscle. Phytotherapy
Research, 1996, 10 (Suppl. 1):S195–S198.
66. Abdul-Ghani AS et al. Hypotensive effect of Crataegus oxyacantha. International
Journal of Crude Drug Research, 1987, 25:216–220.
67. Fehri B et al. Valeriana officinalis et Crataegus oxyacantha toxicité par administrations
réitérées et investigations pharmacologiques. Journale de Pharmacie de Belgique, 1991,
46:165–176.
68. Liévre M et al. Étude des effets cardiovasculaires de l’hyperoside extrait de
l’Aubépine chez le chien anesthésié. Annales pharmaceutiques françaises, 1985,
5:471–477.
69. Rácz-Kotilla E et al. Hypotensive and beta-blocking effect of procyanidins of Crataegus monogyna. Planta Medica, 1980, 39:239.
70. Bahorun T et al. Antioxidant activities of Crataegus monogyna extracts. Planta Medica,
1994, 60:323–328.
71. Bahorun T et al. Oxygen species scavenging activity of phenolic extracts from
hawthorn fresh plant organs and pharmaceutical preparations. Arzneimittel-Forschung,
1996, 46:1086–1089.

81

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
72. Rakotoarison DA et al. Antioxidant activities of polyphenolic extracts from flowers,
in vitro callus and cell suspension culture of Crataegus monogyna. Pharmazie, 1997,
52:60–64.
73. Petkov E et al. Inhibitory effect of some flavonoids and flavonoid mixtures on cyclic
AMP phosphodiesterase activity of rat heart. Planta Medica, 1981, 43:183–186.
74. Schüssler M et al. Comparison of the flavonoids occurring in Crataegus species
and inhibition of 3¢,5¢-cyclic adenosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase. Planta
Medica, 1991, 57 (Suppl. 2):A133.
75. Schüssler M et al. Cardiac effects of flavonoids from Crataegus species. Planta
Medica, 1993, 59 (Suppl. 2):A688.
76. Vibes J et al. Inhibition of thromboxane A2 biosynthesis in vitro by the main
components of Crataegus oxyacantha (hawthorn) flower heads. Prostaglandins,
Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 1994, 50:173–175.
77. Vibes J et al. Effects of a methanolic extract from Crataegus oxyacantha blossoms on
TXA2 and PGI2 synthesising activities of cardiac tissue. Medical Science Research,
1993, 21:435–436.
78. Wrocinski T. Determination of the activity of spasmolytic drugs with reference to
the papaverine standard. Biuletyn Instytutu Roslin Lecznniczych, 1960, 6:236.
79. Beretz A et al. Choix de méthodes pharmacologiques pour l’étude des activités de
l’aubépine. Plantes médicinales et Phytothérapie, 1978, 12:305–314.
80. Della Loggia R et al. Depressive effect of Crataegus oxyacantha L. on central nervous
system in mice. Science and Pharmacy, 1983, 51:319–324.
81. Borkowski B. Diuretic action of several flavone drugs. Planta Medica, 1960, 8:95–104.
82. Schlegelmilch R, Heywood R. Toxicity of Crataegus (hawthorne) extract (WS 1442).
Journal of the American College of Toxicology, 1994, 13:103–111.
83. Hecker-Niediek AE. Untersuchungen zur Biogenese, Markierung und Pharmakokinetik der
Procyanidine aus Crataegus-Species [Dissertation]. Marburg, University of Marburg,
1983.
84. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
85. Schimmer O et al. The mutagenic potencies of plant extracts containing quercetin
in Salmonella typhimurium TA98 and TA100. Mutation Research, 1988, 206:201–208.
86. Albrecht A, Juretzek W. Weissdorn (Crataegus laevigata, Crataegus monogyna), Weissdornblätter mit Blüten (Crataegi folium cum flore). Berlin, Springer: Loseblatt System
Naturheilverfahren, 1995.

82

Radix Eleutherococci

Definition
Radix Eleutherococci consists of the dried roots and rhizomes of Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. and Maxim.) Maxim. (Araliaceae) (1–3).1

Synonyms
Acanthopanax senticosus (Rupr. et Maxim.) Harms., Hedera senticosa (1, 4, 6).

Selected vernacular names
Buisson du diable, chi wu cha, ciwujia, devil’s bush, devil’s shrub, eleuthero,
eleutherococc, eleutherococoque, eleutherokokk koljucij, ezoukogi, gashi
ohgap, hongmao-wujiapi, many prickle acanthopanax, pai wu cha pi,
prickly eleutherococc, prickly eleutherococcus, shigoka, Siberian ginseng,
Stachelkraftwurz, Stachelpanax, taiga root, Taigawurzel, thorny ginseng,
thorny Russian pepperbush, touch-me-not, tsu wu cha, wild pepper, wu
cha sang, wu cha seng, wu jia pi (2, 7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to south-east Asia, northern China, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Japan and the south-eastern part of the Russian Federation
(4, 5).

Description
A prickly shrub, up to 4–6 m high, usually with several mostly unbranched
stems; oldest stems may be unarmed, while the youngest are densely covered
with flexible prickles. Palmate leaves, on long, often reddish stalks, usually composed of 5 elliptical leaflets with serrate margins. Flowers small, polygamous,
occurring toward the tips of stems in single or paired umbels that have long
peduncles. Floral parts are in groups of 5, including the epigynous ovary
surrounded by a nectar-secreting disc. Fruit, a drupe, contains the same number
of kernels as carpels. Flower and fruit resemble those of ivy (Hedera helix) (8).
1

A 33% ethanol extract of Radix Eleutherococci is listed as Extractum Radicis et Rhizomatis
Eleutherococcus in the Russian Pharmacopoeia (4, 5).

83

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Plant material of interest: dried roots and rhizomes
Roots from the unrelated plant Periploca sepium Bunge (Asclepiadaceae)
(Chinese silk vine) have been surreptitiously used as a substitute for Radix
Eleutherococci in commerce. To a lesser extent, roots from the related Acanthopanax species and Kalopanax septemlobus (Thunb.) Koidz. (Araliaceae) have
also been so used (9, 10).

General appearance
Roots: cylindrical, up to 0.5 cm in diameter, straight, occasionally branched,
dark brown, smooth surface with bark adhering closely to the xylem. Rhizomes: up to 4 cm thick, pale brown, longitudinally wrinkled, showing root
scars and traces of aerial stems; fracture somewhat fibrous; fractured surface
pale yellow (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faint, aromatic; taste: bitter, acrid, persistent (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Roots: rows (5–7) of brown cork cells; secondary phloem containing secretory
canals in groups of 4 or 5, up to 20 mm in diameter, with brown contents;
phloem fibres with thick, lignified walls occurring singly or in small groups;
cluster crystals of calcium oxalate in phloem parenchyma; parenchymatous
cells surrounding secretory cells and the medullary ray cells containing small
starch grains; xylem of reticulate and bordered, pitted vessels. Rhizomes:
similar to the roots except for larger secretory canals, up to 25 mm in diameter,
and presence of parenchymatous pith containing starch grains (1).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish; numerous groups of thick-walled, lignified fibres; fragments of reticulate and bordered, pitted vessels with a wide lumen; groups of secretory
canals, up to 20 mm in diameter, with brown contents; parenchymatous cells
containing cluster crystals of calcium oxalate 10–50 mm in diameter; small
starch grains, rounded to slightly angular in outline, single or in groups of
2 or 3 (3).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1–3), thin-layer chromatography
(2, 3) and high-performance liquid chromatography (11–13).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (14).
84

Radix Eleutherococci

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 3% (3). Must be free of Periploca sepium and other foreign plant
materials.

Total ash
Not more than 6% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1.5% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 4% (1).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 6% using 75% ethanol (3).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (15), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14) and
pesticide residues (16).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (14) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical tests to be established in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Several methods based on high-performance liquid chromatography are available for quantitative determination of syringaresinol-diglucoside (eleutheroside
E) and syringin (eleutheroside B) (11–13).
85

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Major chemical constituents
The constituents responsible for the characteristic biological effects of
Radix Eleutherococci appear to be a complex mixture of phenylpropane derivatives of diverse structure, and various sugar polymers (4, 6, 11). The principal components of the former group are the lignans, (+)-sesamin (eleutheroside
B4), (+)-syringaresinol and its monoglucoside (eleutheroside E1) and diglucoside (eleutherosides D and E); the simple phenylpropanes, syringenin and
its monoglucoside (eleutheroside B); and the coumarins isofraxidin and
its monoglucoside (eleutheroside B1). An immunostimulant polysaccharide complex and a glycan series (eleutherans A–G) have also been isolated
from the drug (17). b-Sitosterol and daucosterol (eleutheroside A) are the major
sterols. Eleutheroside E has been found in all samples regardless of geographical origin, whereas eleutheroside B is present in all samples, except those from
plants grown in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (11, 12). The structures of the representative constituents are presented below.
O
H

O

H

OCH3

O

O

O

H

O

H

(+)-sesamin

O

H

H3CO

OCH3
O

Glc

eleutheroside D
1-epi = eleutheroside E

OCH3

H3CO

OCH3

OH
R

O
R

syringenin
R=H
eleutheroside B R = Glc

H3C

H

H

H

O
R

86

H

HO
O

O
O

H

HO
OH
b-D-glucopyranosyl

CH3

HO

CH3

HO

H 3C

O
OH
O

H
OH
daucosterol R = Glc
b-sitosterol R = H

OH

Glc =

isofraxidin
R=H
eleutheroside B1 R = Glc

CH3

H

O

H3CO

OCH3

CH3

OCH3

H

(+)-syringaresinol R = H
eleutheroside E1 R = Glc

O

H

O

OCH3

H

O

H

R

OCH3

1

H

H3CO

H

HO

Glc

H

O

O

eleutheroside C

CH3

Radix Eleutherococci

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
As a prophylactic and restorative tonic for enhancement of mental and physical capacities in cases of weakness, exhaustion and tiredness, and during convalescence (4, 18–20).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, insomnia and dream-disturbed sleep (2).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
As a carminative in the treatment of acute and chronic gastritis, as a diuretic,
to treat impotence and to regulate blood pressure (7).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Adaptogenic/antistress activity
The mechanism of the antistress or adaptogenic activities of Radix Eleutherococci appears to be threefold. Extracts of the roots have an adaptogenic effect
that produces a non-specific increase in the body’s defence against exogenous
stress factors and noxious chemicals (4, 21, 22). The roots also stimulate the
immune system, and promote an overall improvement in physical and mental
performance (4).
Numerous in vivo studies have demonstrated the pharmacological activity
of a 33% ethanol extract of the roots in a variety of animal models (4, 23–29).
Most of these investigations were designed to analyse the adaptogenic response
to a variety of adverse conditions (stress, immobilization or chemical challenge)
(4, 24, 25, 28, 30). An increase in the resistance of rats to the toxic effects of
noxious chemicals such as alloxan, cyclophosphan, ethymidine and benzo-tepa
was observed after oral administration of a 33% ethanol extract of the roots
(1–5 ml/kg body weight) (24, 25, 28). Intragastric administration of a 33%
ethanol extract of the roots to mice (10 ml/kg body weight) decreased the toxicity of diethylglycolic acid, but did not reduce the severity of electroshockinduced convulsions (31). Administration of a 10% decoction of the roots to
frogs’ ventral lymph sac (0.1 ml) protected them against injection of lethal doses
of cardiac glycosides (32). Intragastric administration of a 33% ethanol extract
of the roots (1.0 ml/kg body weight) daily for 21–23 days increased the resistance of rats to the toxic effects of alloxan, but did not lower alloxan-induced
hyperglycaemia (33). Intragastric administration of a freeze-dried extract of the
roots (80 or 320 mg/kg body weight) daily for 3 days decreased blood glucose
levels of mice by 35% and 60%, respectively, compared with placebo treat87

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
ment (34). Reduction of blood glucose levels may be due partially to enhanced
synthesis of glycogen and high-energy phosphate compounds (35).
Investigations to elucidate the adaptogenic effect on the lymphatic system
assessed the ability of root extracts to inhibit cortisone-induced weight
decreases of the thymus and spleen in rats (4). Intraperitoneal administration
of a 33% ethanol extract of the roots (1.0 ml/kg body weight) daily for 8 days
prevented a decrease in spleen and thymus weight due to cortisone administration (22). A 33% ethanol root extract had normalizing effects on
experimentally induced hypothermia when administered intragastrically to rats
and mice (0.1 or 1.0 ml/kg body weight) daily for 12–14 days (36). Intragastric
administration of a 33% ethanol extract of the roots to rats and mice normalized experimentally induced hypothermia, and acted as a sedative (37).
Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the roots to mice
(500 mg/kg body weight) decreased stress-induced enlargement of the adrenal
gland, normalized a decrease in rectal temperature due to chronic stress, and
enhanced sexual behaviour (26). Intragastric administration of an aqueous
extract of the roots (500 mg/kg body weight) daily for 15 days prolonged the
swimming times of rats (38). Intragastric administration of an aqueous or
butanol extract of the roots to rats (500 mg/kg body weight) suppressed gastric
ulcer formation induced by stress (immersion in cold water) (39). Intragastric
administration of an aqueous extract of the roots (500 mg/kg body weight) to
rats suppressed the decrease in locomotor activity induced by exposure to light,
indicating a reduction in the anxiety levels of the animals (40).
The antistress or adaptogenic effects of Radix Eleutherococci are produced
through metabolic regulation of energy, nucleic acids and proteins of the
tissues. Under stress, a b-lipoprotein–glucocorticoid complex is generated in the
blood. This complex inhibits permeation of cell membranes by sugars and also
inhibits hexokinase activity in vivo and in vitro (4). The root extracts increase
the formation of glucose-6-phosphate, which in turn decreases the competition
between the different pathways of its utilization. In animal tissues deficient
in ATP, glucose-6-phosphate is oxidized via the pentose phosphate pathway,
yielding substrates for the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and proteins (4). The
constituents syringin (eleutheroside B) and (-)-syringaresinol-4,4¢-O-b-Ddiglucoside (eleutheroside E) are thought to be responsible for the adaptogenic
activity (21). Intraperitoneal administration of total eleutherosides isolated from
the roots to rats (5.0 mg/kg body weight) partially reversed the decrease in the
levels of muscle ATP, glycogen, creatine phosphate, lactic acid and pyruvic acid
induced by 2 hours of swimming. The same treatment also increased the work
capacity of mice (41). Intraperitoneal administration of total eleutherosides to
rats (15 mg/kg body weight), 1 hour prior to 15 minutes of forced swimming,
delayed the inhibition of RNA polymerase. The same treatment also increased
the activity of this enzyme during rest periods (42). Intragastric administration
of a butanol extract of the roots to mice (170 mg/kg body weight, daily, 6 days
a week for 6 weeks) enhanced the activities of oxidative enzymes and superoxide dismutase in skeletal muscle, resulting in improved aerobic metabolic
88

Radix Eleutherococci
rates (43). Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the roots to mice
(170 mg/kg body weight, daily for 9 weeks) increased the activity of succinate
dehydrogenase and malate dehydrogenase in skeletal muscle (44).
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous root extract to mice (40–
320 mg/kg body weight) increased sleeping times up to 228% compared to controls treated with hexobarbital, and decreased sleep latency when given in conjunction with hexobarbital (45).
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous extract of the roots to rats
(3 mg/kg body weight) caused a significant increase in corticosterone levels
3 hours after injection, whereas adrenocorticotropic hormone levels remained
unchanged (40). Intraperitoneal administration of a fluidextract of the roots
(1.0 ml/kg body weight) increased anabolic activity in male rats (46). Oral
administration of a glycoside fraction isolated from an ethanol root extract to
rats (5.0 mg/kg body weight) increased the body weight and RNA content of
the prostate and seminal vesicles, and inhibited atrophy of the prostate and
seminal vesicles in castrated animals (47). A 30% ethanol extract of the roots
was shown to bind in vitro to the estrogen receptor in rat uterus, and the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors in rat kidney, but not to the androgen receptor in rat kidney (48).
Antimicrobial activity
Parenteral administration of a 33% ethanol extract of the roots (dose not specified) increased the resistance of mice and rabbits to listeriosis when administered for 15 days prior to infection (49, 50). However, administration of the
extract simultaneously with the bacteria increased the severity of the infection
(49). Intragastric administration of the same extract (1 ml daily) for 15 days
stimulated specific antiviral immunity in guinea-pigs and mice (51). A polysaccharide fraction of the roots (0.01 mg/ml) increased the activities of
lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells and enhanced the activities of interleukin 2-stimulated LAK cells in vitro (52). A 95% ethanol extract of the roots
(1 ml daily) increased phagocytosis of Candida albicans by human granulocytes
and monocytes in vitro by 30–45% (53). Intraperitoneal administration of a
polysaccharide fraction isolated from an aqueous root extract (10 mg/kg body
weight) had immunostimulant activity in mice, as demonstrated by the colloidal carbon clearance test (17). A pyrogen-free polysaccharide fraction of the
roots stimulated lymphocyte phagocytosis and T-cell-dependent functions of
B-cells in vitro, as determined by plaque-forming cell stimulation assays and
the production of anti-bovine serum albumin antibodies. Intraperitoneal
administration of the same polysaccharide fraction to mice (100 mg/kg body
weight daily for 7 days) significantly increased plaque-forming cell counts, antibovine serum albumin antibody levels and the phagocytic activity of lymphocytes (54). Intraperitoneal administration of a polysaccharide fraction of an
aqueous extract of the roots to mice (125 mg/kg body weight) markedly
increased the serum levels of anti-bovine serum albumin IgA and total antibovine serum albumin immunoglobulins, but not total IgA (55).
89

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Inhibition of platelet aggregation
A 100% methanol extract of the root inhibited ADP-induced platelet aggregation in blood samples from rats and humans in vitro (56).

Clinical pharmacology
Adaptogenic/antistress activity
Numerous clinical studies, designed to measure the adaptogenic effects of
Radix Eleutherococci, were performed in Russia during the 1960s and 1970s
(reviewed in Farnsworth et al., 1985 [4]). In 35 clinical trials without controls,
involving over 2100 healthy subjects (4–1000 per study), oral administration of
a 33% ethanol root extract (2.0–20.0 ml, daily for up to 60 days) improved physical and mental work performance under stress conditions, and reduced auditory disorders and the incidence of illness (4, 30).
In another 35 clinical trials without controls, the effects of a 33% ethanol
extract of the roots were assessed in 2200 patients (5–1200 per study) with
various disorders, such as arteriosclerosis, acute pyelonephritis, diabetes,
hypertension, hypotension, chronic bronchitis and rheumatic heart disease.
Patients received 0.5–6.0 ml extract orally 1–3 times daily for up to eight courses
of 35 days each, each course being separated by 2–3 weeks without treatment.
The overall results were generally positive: for example, blood pressure was
normalized, serum prothrombin and cholesterol levels were reduced, and
overall well-being and physical work performance improved (4). It should be
noted, however, that these trials lacked good methodology (for example, they
used only a small number of patients, lacked proper controls and randomization, and were not double-blind).
A single-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial in six baseball players
assessed the effects of a 33% ethanol root extract on maximal work capacity.
Three maximal work tests using a bicycle ergometer were performed on 3 consecutive days prior to treatment, and two tests were carried out after treatment
with either 2 ml extract (containing 0.53 mg syringin (eleutheroside B) and
0.12 mg syringaresinol-4,-4¢-O-b-diglucoside (identified here as eleutheroside
D)) or placebo orally twice daily for 8 days. After each work test, maximal
oxygen uptake, oxygen pulse, total work time and exhaustion time were measured. A significant improvement in all four parameters was observed in subjects treated with the extract (P < 0.01), including a 23.3% increase in total work
time as compared with only a 7.5% increase following placebo treatment (18).
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study measured the effect of
an ethanol extract of the roots (standardized to contain 0.2% w/v syringin) on
the immune system, using quantitative multiparameter flow cytometry with
monoclonal antibodies directed against specific surface markers of human lymphocyte subsets to determine cellular immune status. Thirty-six healthy subjects were treated orally with either 10 ml extract or placebo three times daily
for 4 weeks. Subjects treated with the extract had a significant increase in the
total number of immunocompetent cells (P < 0.0001), including lymphocytes
90

Radix Eleutherococci
(predominantly T-cells, T-helper/inducer cells and natural killer cells). A significant increase in activated T-cells was also observed (P < 0.01) (19). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study examined the effect of the crude
drug on submaximal and maximal exercise performance. Twenty highly trained
distance runners received either a 30–34% ethanol extract of the roots (3.4 ml)
or placebo daily for 8 weeks, during which they completed five trials of both
10 minute and maximal treadmill tests. Heart rate, oxygen consumption,
expired minute volume, ventilatory equivalent for oxygen, respiratory
exchange ratio and rating of perceived exertion were measured during both
tests. Serum lactate levels were analysed in blood samples. No significant differences were observed in any of the measured parameters between the
placebo and treatment groups (57). A randomized, placebo-controlled,
crossover study of 30 healthy volunteers compared the effects of Radix Eleutherococci, Panax ginseng and placebo on maximal oxygen uptake, using a bicycle
ergometer. After 6 weeks of treatment, maximal oxygen uptake increased significantly only in subjects who had received P. ginseng (58). A comparative study
assessed the ability of tinctures of Radix Eleutherococci and Leuzea carthamoides
(containing eleutherosides and ecdysones, respectively) to decrease blood coagulation in highly trained athletes. Athletes treated with a 20-day course of
the Radix Eleutherococci tincture showed a decrease in blood coagulation, and
the activity of blood coagulation factors induced by intensive training (59).

Contraindications
Radix Eleutherococci should not be used during pregnancy or lactation, or by
patients with blood pressure in excess of 180/90 mmHg (24/12 kPa) (4). Radix
Eleutherococci is also contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of the
Araliaceae family.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Drug interactions
There is one case report of an increased level of serum digoxin due to the concomitant use of digoxin and Radix Eleutherococci (60). However, the identity
of the plant material as Eleutherococcus senticosus was not established, and it is
believed that it may have been Periploca sepium, which contains cardiac glycosides (9, 10).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No carcinogenicity was observed in rats (61). No mutagenic activities were
observed in the Salmonella/microsome assay using S. typhimurium strains TA100
91

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
and TA98, in the mouse bone marrow micronucleus test, or in rats in vivo (61).
Desmutagenic effects were observed in Drosophila (62, 63).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No teratogenic effects were observed in the offspring of rats administered total
eleutherosides intragastrically (10 mg/kg body weight) daily for 16 days, or in
pregnant rats given 13.5 ml/kg body weight fluidextract of Radix Eleutherococci
daily during days 6–15 of gestation (64, 65). No teratogenic effects were
observed in the offspring of sheep or mink when an ethanol extract of the roots
was added to the diet (4). (See also Contraindications.)

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
and laboratory test interactions or paediatric use. Therefore, Radix Eleutherococci should not be used in children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
A few cases of insomnia, arrhythmia (including tachycardia), extrasystole and
hypertonia were reported in a clinical study involving 64 patients with atherosclerosis, who received a 33% ethanol extract of the crude drug at a dose of
4.5–6.0 ml daily for 6–8 cycles of treatment (lasting 25–35 days) (66). In another
study of 55 patients with rheumatic heart lesions, two patients experienced
hypertension, pericardial pain and palpitations, and pressure headaches after
ingesting 3 ml of a 33% ethanol extract of the roots daily for 28 days (67).
Insomnia has also been reported as a side-effect in other clinical trials (4). In
one case report, neonatal androgenization was tentatively associated with the
ingestion of Radix Eleutherococci tablets during pregnancy (68, 69). However,
analysis of the raw materials used in the preparation of the tablets indicated
that they were probably from Periploca sepium (70). Furthermore, intragastric
administration of either Radix Eleutherococci or P. sepium to rats (1.5 g/kg body
weight) did not demonstrate any androgenization potential, indicating that the
neonatal androgenization was probably not due to the plant material (71).

Dosage forms
Powdered crude drug or extracts in capsules, tablets, teas, syrups, fluidextracts
(63). Store in a well-closed container, protected from light (3).
92

Radix Eleutherococci

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 2–3 g powdered crude drug or equivalent preparations (20).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Beijing, Chemical
Industry Press, 1997.
3. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
4. Farnsworth NR et al. Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus): current status as an
adaptogen. In: Wagner H, Hikino H, Farnsworth NR, eds. Economic and medicinal plant
research. Vol. 1. London, Academic Press, 1985:217–284.
5. Steinegger E, Hänsel R. Lehrbuch der Pharmakognosie und Phytopharmazie. 4. Auflage.
Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
6. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
7. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
8. Collisson RJ. Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus Maxim.). British Journal of
Phytotherapy, 1991, 2:61–71.
9. Awang D. Eleuthero. Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal, 1996, 129:52–54.
10. Awang D. Siberian ginseng toxicity may be a case of mistaken identity. Canadian
Medical Association Journal, 1996, 155:1237.
11. Bladt S, Wagner H, Woo WS. Taiga-Wurzel. DC- und HPLC-Analyse von Eleutherococcus-bzw. Acanthopanax-Extrakten und diese enthaltenden Phytopräparaten.
Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung, 1990, 130:1499–1508.
12. Slacanin I et al. The isolation of Eleutherococcus senticosus constituents by centrifugal partition chromatography and their quantitative determination by highperformance liquid chromatography. Phytochemical Analysis, 1991, 2:137–142.
13. Yat Y et al. An improved extraction procedure for the rapid quantitative HPLC estimation of the main eleutherosides in Eleutherococcus senticosus. Phytochemical Analysis, 1998, 9:291–295.
14. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
15. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
17. Wagner H et al. Immunstimulierend wirkende Polysaccharide (Heteroglykane) aus
höheren Pflanzen. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1984, 345:659–661.
18. Asano K et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus extracts on human physical working
capacity. Planta Medica, 1986, 4:175–177.
19. Bohn B et al. Flow-cytometric studies with Eleutherococcus senticosus extract as an
immunomodulatory agent. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1987, 37:1193–1196.
20. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
21. Brekhman II, Dardymov JV. Pharmacological investigation of glycosides from
ginseng and Eleutherococcus. Lloydia, 1969, 31:46–51.
22. Kirillov OI. Opyt farmakologicheskoy reguljacii stressa. Vladivostok, 1966:106.
23. Brekhman II, Kirillov OI. Effect of Eleutherococcus on alarm-phase of stress. Life
Sciences, 1969, 8:113–121.

93

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
24. Monakhov BV. Influence of the liquid extract from the roots of Eleutherococcus
senticosus Maxim. on toxicity and antitumor activity of cyclophosphan. Voprosy
Onkologii, 1965, 11:60–63.
25. Monakhov BV. The effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus on the therapeutic activity of
cyclophosphan, ethymidine or benzo-tepa. Voprosy Onkologii, 1967, 13:94–97.
26. Nishiyama N et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus and its components on sexand learning behaviour and tyrosine hydroxylase activities of adrenal gland and
hypothalamic regions in chronic stressed mice. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1985, 39:238–
242.
27. Singh N et al. Antistress activity in a muramyl dipeptide. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1990, 28:686–687.
28. Stukov AN. The influence of Eleutherococcus on the leukemogenic activity of indole.
Voprosy Onkologii, 1967, 13:94–95.
29. Takasugi M et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus and its components on rectal
temperature, body and grip tones, motor coordination, and exploratory and spontaneous movements in acute stressed mice. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1985, 39:232–237.
30. Halstead BW, Hood LL. Eleutherococcus senticosus, Siberian ginseng: an introduction to the
concept of adaptogenic medicine. Long Beach, CA, Oriental Healing Arts Institute, 1984.
31. Kolla VF, Ovodenko IA. Lekarstrennye Sredstva Dal’nego Vostoka, 1966, 7:33.
32. Golotkin GF, Bojko SN. On the treatment of atherosclerosis with Eleutherococcus.
In: Brekhman II, ed. Eleutherococcus and other adaptogens among the Far Eastern Plants.
Vladivostok, Far Eastern Publishing House, 1966:213–220.
33. Bezdetko GN. The prophylactic and curative effects of Eleutherococcus on the course
of alloxan-induced diabetes. In: Brekhman II, ed. Eleutherococcus and other adaptogens
among the Far Eastern plants. Vladivostok, Far Eastern Publishing House, 1966.
34. Medon PJ et al. Hypoglycemic effect and toxicity of Eleutherococcus senticosus following acute and chronic administration in mice. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica, 1981,
2:281.
35. Brekhman II. Eleutherococcus, 1st ed. Leningrad, Nauka Publishing House, 1968.
36. Abramova ZI et al. Stimulation of catecholamine and serotonin circulation caused
by Eleutherococcus and dibazole. Lekarstvennye Sredstva Dal’nego Vostoka, 1972, 11:
106–108.
37. Rusin IY. Resistance of animals to unfavorable effects increased by Eleutherococcus.
In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Eleutherococcus and ginseng. Vladivostok, The
Academy of Sciences, 1962.
38. Nishibe S et al. Phenolic compounds from the stem bark of Acanthopanax senticosus
and their pharmacological effect in chronic swimming stressed rats. Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1990, 38:1763–1765.
39. Fujikawa T et al. Protective effects of Acanthopanax senticosus HARMS from
Hokkaido and its components on gastric ulcer in restrained cold-water-stressed rats.
Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1996, 19:1227–1230.
40. Winterhoff H et al. Effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus on the pituitary–adrenal
system of rats. Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Letters, 1993, 3:95–98.
41. Brekhman II, Dardymov JV. Eleutherococcus. Sbornik Rabot Instituta Tsitologii Akademiya
Nauk USSR, 1971, 14:82.
42. Bezdetko GN et al. Voprosy Meditsinskoi Khimii, 1973, 19:245.
43. Sugimura H et al. Effects of Eleutherococcus extracts on oxidative enzyme activity
in skeletal muscle, superoxide dismutase activity and lipid peroxidation in mice.
Japanese Journal of Fitness and Sports Medicine, 1992, 41:304–312.
44. Sugimura H et al. Effects of aqueous extracts from Eleutherococcus on the oxidative
enzyme activities in mouse skeletal muscle. Annual Proceedings of the Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 1989, 38:38–48.
45. Medon PJ et al. Effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus extracts on hexobarbital metabolism in vivo and in vitro. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1984, 10:235–241.

94

Radix Eleutherococci
46. Dardymov IV, Kirillov OI. Differences in the weight of some internal organs of
immature rats given Eleutherococcus and testosterone at dosages causing the same
gain in weight of the animals. Lekarstvennye Sredstva Dal’nego Vostoka, 1966, 7:43–47.
47. Dardymov IV. Gonadotropic effect of Eleutherococcus glycosides. Lekarstvennye
Sredstva Dal’nego Vostoka, 1972, 11:60–65.
48. Pearce PT et al. Panax ginseng and Eleutherococcus senticosus extracts—in vitro studies
on binding to steroid receptors. Endocrinologia Japonica, 1982, 29:567–573.
49. Cherkashin GV. The effect of an extract of Eleutherococcus senticosus and a preparation of roseroot sedium (rhodosine) on the severity of experimental listeriosis.
Central Nervous System Stimulants, 1966:91–96.
50. Cherkashin GV. The effects of Eleutherococcus and rhodosine preparations on the
resistance of animals to experimental listeriosis. Izvestiya Sibirskogo Otdeleniya
Akademii Nauk USSR, Seriya Biologo Meditsinkikh Nauk, 1968, 1:116.
51. Fedorov Yu et al. Effect of some stimulants of plant origin on the development of
antibodies and immunomorphological reactions during acarid-borne encephalitis.
Central Nervous System Stimulants, 1966:99–105.
52. Cao GW et al. Influence of four kinds of polysaccharides on the induction of
lymphokine-activated killer cells in vivo. Journal of the Medical College of PLA, 1993,
8:5–11.
53. Wildfeuer A et al. Study of the influence of phytopreparations on the cellular function of body defence. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1994, 44:361–366.
54. Shen ML et al. Immunopharmacological effects of polysaccharides from Acanthopanax senticosus on experimental animals. International Journal of Immunopharmacology, 1991, 13:549–554.
55. Zhu C et al. Effect of polysaccharide from Acanthopanax senticosus on mouse serum
type-specific antibodies. Yao Hsueh T’ung Pao, 1982, 17:178–180.
56. Yun-Choi HS, Kim JH, Lee JR. Potential inhibitors of platelet aggregation from plant
sources, III. Journal of Natural Products, 1987, 50:1059–1064.
57. Dowling EA et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus on submaximal and maximal
exercise performance. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 1995, 28:482–
489.
58. McNaughton L et al. A comparison of Chinese and Russian ginseng as ergogenic
aids to improve various facets of physical fitness. International Clinical Nutrition
Reviews, 1989, 9:32–35.
59. Azizov AP. Effects of Eleutherococcus, elton, leuzea, and leveton on the blood
coagulation system during training in athletes. Eksperimentalnaia I Klinicheskaia
Farmakologiia, 1997, 60:58–60.
60. McRae S. Elevated serum digoxin levels in a patient taking digoxin and Siberian
ginseng. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 1996, 155:293–295.
61. Hirosue T et al. Mutagenicity and subacute toxicity of Acanthopanax senticosus
extracts in rats. Journal of the Food Hygiene Society of Japan, 1986, 27:380–386.
62. Sakharova TA et al. The effect of Eleutherococcus extract on the induction of recessive lethal mutations by cyclophosphane and N-nitrosomorpholine in Drosophila.
Khimiko Farmatseevticheskii Zhurnal, 1985, 19:539–540.
63. Sonnenborn U, Hänsel R. Eleutherococcus senticosus. In: De Smet PAGM et al., eds.
Adverse effects of herbal drugs. Vol. 2. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1993:159–169.
64. Curtze A. Die Arzneipflanze Eleutherococcus senticosus Maxim. in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Der Kassenarzt, 1980, 20:497–503.
65. Dardymov IV et al. Absence of toxicity of Eleutherococcus glycosides during administration for two months. Lekarstvennye Sredstva Dal’nego Vostoka, 1972, 11:66–
69.
66. Golikov AP. Cholesterol synthesis in the small intestine of rabbits and the effect
of Eleutherococcus during a five-day cholesterol load. Lekarstvennye Sredstva Dal’nego
Vostoka, 1966, 7:63–65.

95

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
67. Mikunis RI et al. The effect of Eleutherococcus on some biochemical parameters of
the blood in the combined treatment of patients with rheumatic lesions of the heart.
Lekarstvennye Sredstva Dal’nego Vostoka, 1966, 7:227–230.
68. Koren G et al. Maternal ginseng use associated with neonatal androgenization.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 1990, 264:1866.
69. Koren G et al. Maternal ginseng use and neonatal androgenization. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 1991, 265:1828.
70. Awang D. Maternal use of ginseng and neonatal androgenization. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 1991, 264:2865.
71. Waller DP et al. Lack of androgenicity of Siberian ginseng. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 1991, 265:1826.

96

Aetheroleum Eucalypti

Definition
Aetheroleum Eucalypti is the essential oil obtained by steam distillation and
rectification of the fresh leaves or terminal branchlets of Eucalyptus globulus
Labill (Myrtaceae) or other Eucalyptus species rich in 1,8-cineole (1–3).

Synonyms
Eucalyptus cordata Miq., E. diversifolia Miq., E. gigantea Dehnh., E. glauca D.C.,
E. globulus St Lag., E. pulverulenta Link (4).

Selected vernacular names
Aceite de eucalipto, esencia de eucalipto, essence d’eucalyptus rectifiée, eucalipto essenza, eucalyptus oil, eucalyptus olie, Eucalyptusöl, huile essentielle
d’eucalyptus, klei de eucalipt, minyak ekaliptus, oleo de eucalipto, Oleum eucalypti, tinh dâu Bach dan (1–7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to Australia, cultivated in subtropical regions of the world including Africa, South America (e.g. Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay), Asia (e.g.
China, India and Indonesia), southern Europe and the United States of America
(4, 7–11).

Description
A large tree with smooth bark, very pale or ash-grey, up to 3–20 m high. Branchlets quadrangular, glaucous. Leaves of young trees and first leaves of young
shoots opposite, sessile, oval-oblong, with a cordate base, farinaceousglaucous; older leaves dangling, spirally arranged, lanceolate-falcate, up to
30 cm long. Flowers with very short pedicels, mostly umbellate, sometimes 2–3
in a fascicle. Calyx-tube double: outer tube drops early, smooth, inner tube
semi-persistent and warty. Stamens about 1.5 cm long; fruit turbinate, angular,
2.0–2.5 cm in diameter (12, 13).
97

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Plant material of interest: essential oil
General appearance
A colourless or pale yellow liquid that darkens slightly on long storage (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: aromatic, camphoric; taste: pungent, camphoric, followed by a sensation of cold (1–3).

Microscopic characteristics
Not applicable.

Powdered plant material
Not applicable.

General identity tests
Thin-layer and gas chromatography (1–3).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (14).

Chemical
Refractive index: 1.458–1.470 (1–3); specific gravity: 0.906–0.925 (2); optical
rotation: 0° to +10° (2); solubility in ethanol: soluble in 5 volumes of 70%
ethanol (2, 5). Methods to detect the presence of aldehyde and phellendrene
are available (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (15), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14) and
pesticide residues (16).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (14) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.
98

Aetheroleum Eucalypti

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 70% (w/w) 1,8-cineole (also known as cineol, cineole
or eucalyptol) (1, 2). Quantitative analysis according to the method described
for 1,8-cineole (1–3).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituent is 1,8-cineole (54–95%). In addition, there are moderate
amounts of a-pinene (2.6%), p-cymene (2.7%), aromadendrene, cuminaldehyde, globulol and pinocarveol (11, 13). The structure of 1,8-cineole is presented below.
1,8-cineole (eucalyptol)

CH3
O
CH3
CH3

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Symptomatic treatment of catarrh and coughs (17, 18). As a component of
certain dental root canal sealers; topically as a rubefacient for treatment of
rheumatic complaints (18, 19).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of cystitis, diabetes, gastritis, kidney disease (unspecified),
neuralgia, laryngitis, leukorrhoea, malaria, pimples, ringworm, sinusitis,
wounds, ulcers of the skin, urethritis and vaginitis (4, 6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial activity
Aetheroleum Eucalypti inhibited the growth in vitro of Staphylococcus aureus,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus subtilis, Enterococcus faecalis and Escherichia coli
(20–25), but not of Bacillus cereus, Penicillium cyclopium or Aspergillus aegyptiacus
(22, 25). Intramuscular injection of the essential oil (500 mg/kg body weight)
inhibited the growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in guinea-pigs, and enhanced
the efficacy of streptomycin and isoniazid (26).
99

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Anti-inflammatory activity
The essential oil inhibited prostaglandin biosynthesis in vitro at a concentration of 37 mmol/l (27).
Respiratory tract effects
Intragastric administration of the essential oil increased respiratory tract secretions in cats (100 mg/kg body weight), guinea-pigs (50 mg/kg body weight),
rabbits (100 mg/kg body weight) and rats (100 mg/kg body weight) (28). Administration of non-lethal doses of the essential oil by steam inhalation to
urethane-treated rabbits did not enhance the output of respiratory tract fluid
(29).
Antitussive effects
The antitussive effect of the essential oil was compared to that of codeine in
guinea-pigs in which coughs were induced by mechanical stimulation. Inhalation of the essential oil (5% emulsified in normal saline) had a significant antitussive effect relative to codeine (15 mg/kg body weight) of 0.68 (P < 0.05).
When the essential oil was administered by intraperitoneal injection (50 mg/kg
body weight), the antitussive effect relative to codeine was 0.57, which was
also significant (P < 0.001) (30).

Clinical pharmacology
Nasal decongestant activity
A clinical trial without controls assessed the effects of Aetheroleum Eucalypti
as a nasal decongestant in 31 healthy volunteers. Inhalation of the essential
oil (10 ml) over a period of 5 minutes had no effect on nasal resistance to airflow.
However, the oil had a stimulant or sensitizing effect on nasal cold receptors,
and the majority of subjects reported a sensation of increased airflow (31). A
single-blind, parallel clinical trial assessed the efficacy of vaporized essential oil,
camphor, menthol or steam in reducing nasal congestion in 234 patients with
acute respiratory tract infections. The essential oil was significantly more effective in reducing nasal congestion only during the first hour following treatment
(P < 0.02) (32). In other clinical studies of patients with acute common colds,
no significant differences in nasal decongestant activity were reported between
the essential oil (1.3%) in petrolatum and a petrolatum placebo (32).
Analgesic activity
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study assessed the
efficacy of a combination product of the essential oil (eucalyptus oil) and
Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae (peppermint oil) for headache relief in 32
patients. Five different preparations were used (all in 90% ethanol, to a final
weight of 100 g): 10 g peppermint oil and 5 g eucalyptus oil; 10 g peppermint
oil and traces of eucalyptus oil; traces of peppermint oil and 5 g eucalyptus
oil; traces of both peppermint oil and eucalyptus oil; or a placebo. The test
100

Aetheroleum Eucalypti
preparations or placebo were applied topically to large areas of the forehead
and temples, and the effects on neurophysiological, psychological and experimental algesimetric parameters were measured. All test preparations improved
cognitive performance, and induced muscle and mental relaxation compared to
the placebo, but had no effect on sensitivity to headache (33).

Contraindications
Preparations of Aetheroleum Eucalypti should not be administered internally
to children (34), or patients with inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract,
gall bladder disease or impaired liver function (4, 17, 34). Aetheroleum Eucalypti should not be taken internally during pregnancy (35), see Precautions.

Warnings
Aetheroleum Eucalypti preparations should not be applied to the face, especially the nose, of infants or young children (17). Keep out of reach of children.

Precautions
General
Oily vehicles for the essential oil are unsuitable for use in nasal sprays as the
vehicle inhibits ciliary movement and may cause lipid pneumonia (19).

Drug interactions
Although no published drug interactions were found, a number of animal
studies indicate possible concern that the essential oil may induce liver enzymes
involved in drug metabolism. Therefore, the effects of other drugs may be
decreased following concomitant administration (17, 36).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
The essential oil was a weak promoter of papilloma formation by 9, 10dimethyl-12-benzanthracene in mice. However, the development of tumours
in mice after intragastric administration of 8 or 32 mg 1,8-cineole per kg body
weight daily for 80 weeks was similar to that in mice treated with vehicle
controls (37).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
The essential oil was not teratogenic when administered subcutaneously to
pregnant mice (135 mg/kg body weight) daily on days 6–15 of gestation (38).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Eucalyptol (500 mg/kg body weight, administered subcutaneously) has been
reported to penetrate the placenta in rodents and reach concentrations in the
101

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
fetal blood which are sufficient to stimulate hepatic enzyme activity (39).
Therefore, Aetheroleum Eucalypti should not be taken internally during pregnancy (35).

Paediatric use
See Contraindications and Warnings.

Other precautions
No information available on precautions concerning drug and laboratory test
interactions or nursing mothers. Therefore, Aetheroleum Eucalypti should not
be administered during lactation without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Topical applications of Aetheroleum Eucalypti are generally non-irritating, nonsensitizing and non-phototoxic (40). However, one case of systemic toxicity in
a 6-year-old girl (41), and several cases of urticaria, contact dermatitis and skin
irritation (42) have been reported.
Between 1981 and 1992, the clinical effects of poisoning were observed
in 59% of 109 children after accidental ingestion of the essential oil (2–10 ml)
(43, 44). The symptoms included depression of conscious state (28% of cases),
drowsiness (25% of cases) and unconsciousness (3% of cases), and were dosedependent (43). Other reported symptoms included epigastric burning, nausea,
vomiting, dizziness, muscular weakness, miosis, a feeling of suffocation,
cyanosis, delirium and convulsions (8, 18, 45). Allergic reactions have been
reported after ingestion of 20 lozenges containing the essential oil (46).
Between 1889 and 1922, 17 cases of fatal poisoning due to ingestion of the
essential oil were reported (36). A dose of as little as 3.5 ml was fatal (47).
However, these data are old and the purity of the oil used is unknown.

Dosage forms
Essential oil in solid, semisolid or liquid preparations (1) and galenical preparations (17). Store in a well-filled, tightly closed container, protected from heat
and light (1, 2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Internal use
Daily dosage: 0.3–0.6 ml essential oil or equivalent preparations (17). Capsules:
1 capsule of 100–200 mg, 2–5 times daily (48, 49). Lozenges: 1 lozenge of
0.2–15.0 mg dissolved slowly in the mouth, every 30–60 minutes (32). Mouth102

Aetheroleum Eucalypti
wash: 20 ml of a 0.91 mg/ml solution, gargled twice daily (32). Inhalation: 12
drops/150 ml boiling water (49).
External use
Daily dosage: several drops (17) or 30 ml essential oil in 500 ml lukewarm water
(35) rubbed into the skin for local application; 5–20% essential oil in liquid and
semisolid preparations; 5–10% in hydroalcoholic preparations.

References
1. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China (English ed.). Guangzhou, Guangdong
Science and Technology Press, 1997.
2. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
3. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 13th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of Health and
Welfare, 1996.
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Ekstra Farmakope Indonesia. Jakarta, Departemen Kesehatan, Republik Indonesia,
1974.
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, August 8, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
7. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
8. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific,
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
9. Heyne K. De nuttige planten van Indonesie, 3rd ed. Wageningen, H. Veenman & Konen,
1950.
10. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1993.
11. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
12. Backer CA, van den Brink B. Flora of Java. Vol. 2. Groningen, Netherlands, NVP
Noordhof, 1965.
13. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
14. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
15. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
17. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
18. Reynolds JEF, Prasad AB. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 30th ed. London,
Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
19. Leung AY, Foster S. Encyclopedia of common natural ingredients used in food, drugs, and
cosmetics, 2nd ed. New York, NY, John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
20. Benouda A et al. Les propriétés antiséptiques des huiles essentielles in vitro, testées
contre des germes pathogènes hospitaliers. Fitoterapia, 1988, 59:115–119.
21. Brantner A, Grein E. Antibacterial activity of plant extracts used externally in traditional medicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1994, 44:35–40.
22. El-Keltawi NEM et al. Antimicrobial activity of some Egyptian aromatic plants.
Herba Polonica, 1980, 26:245–250.

103

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
23. Janssen AM et al. Screening for antibacterial activity of some essential oils by the
agar overlay technique. Pharmaceutisch Weekblad, 1986, 8:289–292.
24. Ontengco DC et al. Screening for the antibacterial activity of essential oils from
some Philippine plants. Acta Manilana, 1995, 43:19–23.
25. Ross SA et al. Antimicrobial activity of some Egyptian plants. Fitoterapia, 1980, 51:
201–205.
26. Kufferath F, Mundualdo GM. The activity of some preparations containing essential oils in tuberculosis. Fitoterapia, 1954, 25:483–485.
27. Wagner H et al. In vitro inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis by essential oils
and phenolic compounds. Planta Medica, 1986, 3:184–187.
28. Boyd EM, Pearson GL. On the expectorant action of volatile oils. American Journal
of Medical Science, 1946, 211:602–610.
29. Boyd EM, Sheppard EP. The effect of steam inhalation of volatile oils on the output
and composition of respiratory tract fluid. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Experiential
Practice, 1968, 163:250–256.
30. Misawa M , Kizawa M. Antitussive effects of several volatile oils especially of cedar
leaf oil in guinea pigs. Pharmacometrics, 1990, 39:81–87.
31. Burrows A et al. The effects of camphor, eucalyptus and menthol vapour on
nasal resistance to airflow and nasal sensation. Acta Otolaryngology, 1983, 96:
157–161.
32. Food and Drug Administration. Over-the-counter drugs. Final monograph for OTC
nasal decongestant drug products. Federal Register, 1994, 41:38408–38409.
33. Göbel H et al. Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms. Phytomedicine, 1995,
2:93–102.
34. Eucalyptol preparation (paediatric)—suspended. WHO Pharmaceuticals Newsletter,
1994, 10:2.
35. Newell CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines: a guide for healthcare professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
36. Corrigan D. Eucalyptus species. In: DeSmet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse reactions of
herbal drugs. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1992:125–133.
37. Roe FCJ, Field WEH. Chronic toxicity of essential oils and certain other products of
natural origin. Food, Cosmetics and Toxicology, 1965, 3:311–342.
38. Pages N et al. Les huiles essentielles et leurs propriétés tératogènes potentielles:
exemple de l’huile essentielle d’Eucalyptus globulus, étude préliminaire chez la souris.
Plantes médicinales et Phytotherapie, 1990, 24:21–26.
39. Jori A, Briatico G. Effects of eucalyptol on microsomal enzyme activity of foetal and
newborn rats. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1973, 22:543–544.
40. Opdyke DLJ. Eucalyptus oil. Food, Cosmetics and Toxicology, 1975, 13:107–108.
41. Darben T et al. Topical eucalyptus oil poisoning. Australas Journal of Dermatology,
1998, 39:265–267.
42. Mitchell J, Rook A. Botanical dermatology. Vancouver, Greengrass, 1979.
43. Tibballs J. Clinical effects and management of eucalyptus oil ingestion in infants and
young children. Medical Journal of Australia, 1995, 163:177–180.
44. Day LM et al. Eucalyptus oil poisoning among young children: mechanisms of
access and potential for prevention. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public
Health, 1997, 21:297–301.
45. Hindle RC. Eucalyptus oil ingestion. New Zealand Medical Journal, 1994, 107:
185.
46. Oppenheim M. Exanthema produced by eucalyptus cough drops. Zentralblatt für
Biochemie und Biophysik, 1912, 13:128.
47. MacPherson J. The toxicology of eucalyptus oil. Medical Journal of Australia, 1925,
2:108–110.

104

Aetheroleum Eucalypti
48. ESCOP Monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 6. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1999.
49. Van Hellemont J. In: Fytotherapeutisch Compendium, 2nd ed. Utrecht, Scheltema &
Holkema, 1988:232.

105

Folium Eucalypti

Definition
Folium Eucalypti consists of the dried leaves of Eucalyptus globulus Labill
(Myrtaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Eucalyptus cordata Miq., E. diversifolia Miq., E. gigantea Dehnh., E. glauca D.C.,
E. globulus St Lag., E. pulverulenta Link (4).

Selected vernacular names
Alcanfor, arbre à la fièvre, Australian fever tree, bach dan xanh, Blaugummibaum, bluegum tree, calibtus, calipso, daun ekaliptus, eucalipus, eucalypto,
eucalyptus, Eucalyptusblätter, feuilles d’eucalyptus, fevertree, Fieberbaum,
Fieberhilbaum, gigante, gommier bleu, gommier bleu de Tasmania, gum tree,
iron bark tree, kalatus, kaphur, khuynh diep, mtiulaya, nkwu-ishi, oykaliptus,
Tasmanian bluegum, yukari (1, 4–8).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to Australia, cultivated in subtropical regions of the world including Africa, South America (e.g. Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay), Asia (e.g.
China, India and Indonesia), southern Europe and the United States of America
(1, 4, 6, 8–10).

Description
A large tree with smooth bark, very pale or ash-grey, up to 3–20 m high. Branchlets quadrangular, glaucous. Leaves of young trees and first leaves of young
shoots opposite, sessile, oval-oblong, with a cordate base, farinaceousglaucous; older leaves dangling, spirally arranged, lanceolate-falcate, up to
30 cm long. Flowers with very short pedicels, mostly umbellate, sometimes 2–3
in a fascicle. Calyx tube double: outer tube drops early, smooth; inner tube
semipersistent and warty. Stamens about 1.5 cm long. Fruit turbinate, angular,
2.0–2.5 cm in diameter (11, 12).
106

Folium Eucalypti

Plant material of interest: dried leaves
General appearance
Leaf lanceolate-falcate, bifacial, 8–30 cm long, 2–7 cm wide; petiole twisted,
strongly wrinkled, 2–3 cm, occasionally 5 cm, in length; apex, when present, acute or acuminate; base unequal, obtuse or somewhat rounded, margin
uneven, revolute; ventral and dorsal surfaces greyish-green to pale yellowishgreen, coriaceous, glaucous, glabrous, glandular-punctate, with numerous
small, rounded, brown dots of cork; venation pinnate-reticulate, veins of the
first order running to a short distance from margin where they are anastomosed
and form a vein nearly parallel with the margin (1–3, 8).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: aromatic, camphoric; taste: aromatic, pungent, bitter (1, 3, 8).

Microscopic characteristics
Upper and lower epidermis composed of clear, polygonal cells with thick
cutinized outer walls; both layers possess sunken stomata. Chlorenchyma differentiated into 2 palisade regions: both regions composed of 3–4 (usually 4)
rows of cells which face each epidermis; in each region large, subglobular internal glands occur, lined with secretory epithelium and containing yellow oil.
Parenchyma spongy, a narrow zone of loosely arranged cells between the 2
palisade regions; its cells contain rosette aggregates or monoclinic prisms of
calcium oxalate crystals. Fibrovascular bundles throughout the spongy
parenchyma; in midrib and petiole, interrupted arc of slightly lignified pericyclic
fibres occurs just outside these bundles (8).

Powdered plant material
Greyish-green; fragments of chlorenchyma with numerous embedded, broken,
yellow, schizogenous oil glands; calcium oxalate crystals in rosette aggregates
or monoclinic prisms; fragments of epidermis with polygonal cells having very
thick cuticle, numerous anomocytic stomata of more than 80 mm in diameter,
fragments of sclerenchyma fibres; fragments of cork, tracheids, vessels and
fibres (1, 3, 8).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, microchemical analysis and
thin-layer chromatography for 1,8-cineole (1–3, 8, 13).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (14).
107

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 1% fruits, and not more than 2% stems and other foreign matter
(1–3).

Total ash
Not more than 6% (2, 3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 0.2% (8).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (15), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14) and
pesticide residues (16).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (14) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash, water-soluble extractive and alcohol-soluble extractive
tests to be established in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 2% (v/w) essential oil, consisting of not less than 70%
(w/w) 1,8-cineole (also known as cineol, cineole or eucalyptol) (1, 3). A thinlayer chromatography method is available for qualitative determination, using
1,8-cineole as a reference standard (3).

Major chemical constituents
Dried leaves contain 1–3% (v/w) essential oil (fresh leaves contain 0.4–1.6%),
the major constituent of which is 1,8-cineole (54–95%). In addition, there are
moderate amounts of other monoterpenes, including a-pinene (2.6%),
108

Folium Eucalypti
p-cymene (2.7%), aromadendrene, cuminaldehyde, globulol and pinocarveol.
Gas chromatography and gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy of the oil
indicated the presence of more than 70 components, 48 of which were identified. The concentration of a-terpeneol was estimated to be 28% (17). The
leaves are rich in tannins and ellagitannins, and also contain 2–4% triterpenes
(ursolic acid derivatives), a series of phloroglucinol-sesquiterpene-coupled
derivatives (macrocarpals B, C, D, E, H, I and J) and flavonoids (rutin, quercetin,
quercitrin and hyperoside) (5, 7, 10, 12, 17–19). The structure of the major
monoterpene, 1,8-cineole, is presented below.
1,8-cineole (eucalyptol)

CH3
O
CH3
CH3

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As an expectorant for symptomatic treatment of mild inflammation of the respiratory tract and bronchitis (20). Also for symptomatic treatment of asthma,
fever and inflammation of the throat (1).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of cystitis, diabetes, gastritis, kidney disease (unspecified), laryngitis, leukorrhoea, malaria, pimples, ringworm, wounds, ulcers of the skin,
urethritis and vaginitis (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antibacterial and antifungal activity
An ethanol–water extract of Folium Eucalypti inhibited the growth in vitro of
Staphylococcus aureus at a concentration of 25 mg/ml (21). An aqueous leaf extract
inhibited the growth in vitro of Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis and Enterococcus faecalis (MIC 0.07–1.30 mg/ml) (22). A methanol extract of
the leaves inhibited the growth in vitro of Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida albicans (MIC 1.25–10.00 mg/ml) (23). A
109

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
fluidextract of the leaves inhibited the growth in vitro of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MIC 6.25 mg/ml) (24). A methanol–water extract of the leaves inhibited
the growth in vitro of Candida albicans (25).
Antiviral activity
An aqueous leaf extract inhibited the replication of influenza virus A2
(Mannheim 57), vaccinia virus and herpes simplex virus type 2 in vitro at a
concentration of 0.1% (26).
Antimalarial activity
Intragastric administration of a hexane leaf extract to mice (100 mg/kg body
weight) did not inhibit the growth of Plasmodium berghei (27). Furthermore,
administration of an aqueous (3.48 g/kg body weight) or chloroform (264 mg/kg
body weight) leaf extract to chickens by gastric lavage did not inhibit the
growth of P. gallinaceum (28). An ethanol–water extract of the leaves inhibited
the growth in vitro of P. falciparum at a concentration of 75 mg/ml (21).
Antidiabetes activity
A hot aqueous extract of the leaves suppressed streptozocin-induced hyperglycaemia in mice when added to the diet (6.25%) and drinking-water (0.25%).
The same extract did not stimulate insulin production by the pancreas (29).
However, intragastric administration of aqueous or ethanol extracts of the
leaves at a dose of 1 g/kg body weight did not suppress alloxan-induced hyperglycaemia in mice and rabbits (30, 31).

Clinical pharmacology
None.

Contraindications
Preparations of Folium Eucalypti should not be administered internally to children or patients with inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract, gall bladder
disease or impaired liver function (4, 20).

Warnings
Folium Eucalypti preparations should not be applied to the face, especially the
nose, of infants or young children (20). Keep out of reach of children.

Precautions
Drug interactions
Although no published drug interactions were found, a number of animal
studies indicate possible concern that the leaf essential oil may induce liver
110

Folium Eucalypti
enzymes involved in drug metabolism. Therefore, the effects of other drugs
may be decreased following concomitant administration (20, 32 ).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A tincture of the leaves was not mutagenic in the Salmonella/microsome assay
using S. typhimurium strains TA100 and TA98 (33).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
The leaf essential oil was not teratogenic when administered subcutaneously
to pregnant mice (135 mg/kg body weight) daily on days 6–15 of gestation (34).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Eucalyptol (500 mg/kg body weight, administered subcutaneously) has been
reported to penetrate the placenta in rodents, and reach concentrations in
the fetal blood which are sufficient to stimulate hepatic enzyme activity
(35). Therefore, Folium Eucalypti should not be administered during pregnancy
without medical supervision.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications and Warnings.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
and laboratory test interactions or nursing mothers. Therefore, Folium Eucalypti should not be used during lactation without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Excessive ingestion of Folium Eucalypti can cause nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea (20). Several cases of urticaria, contact dermatitis and skin irritation have
been reported after therapeutic doses (36).

Dosage forms
Crude drug (1, 20). Store in a tightly closed container, protected from light (3).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 4–6 g crude drug or equivalent preparations. Infusion: pour
150 ml of hot water over a half teaspoon of the leaves, allow them to stand for
10 minutes, then remove the leaves with a strainer (10, 20). One cup (240 ml)
of the freshly prepared infusion is drunk slowly three times daily. The vapour
of the hot infusion is inhaled deeply (10).
111

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

References
1. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific,
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
3. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 14, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1993.
7. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for health-care
professionals. London, The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
8. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
9. Heyne K. De nuttige planten van Indonesie, 3rd ed. Wageningen, H. Veenman & Konen,
1950.
10. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
11. Backer CA, van den Brink B. Flora of Java. Vol. 2. Groningen, Netherlands, NVP
Noordhof, 1965.
12. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
13. Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant drug analysis, 2nd ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1996.
14. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
15. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
17. Zhao ZD et al. Gas chromatography of residue from fractional distillation of
Eucalyptus globulus leaf oil. Linchan Huaxue Yu Gongye, 1997, 17:37–40.
18. Nishizawa M et al. Macrocarpals: HIV-RTase inhibitors of Eucalyptus globulus.
Tetrahedron Letters, 1992, 33:2983–2986.
19. Osawa K et al. Macrocarpals H, I, and J from the leaves of Eucalyptus globulus. Journal
of Natural Products, 1996, 59:823–827.
20. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin,
TX, American Botanical Council, 1998.
21. Aswal BS et al. Screening of Indian plants for biological activity. Part X. Indian Journal
of Experimental Biology, 1984, 22:312–322.
22. Brantner A, Grein E. Antibacterial activity of plant extracts used externally in
traditional medicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1994, 44:35–40.
23. Navarro V et al. Antimicrobial evaluation of some plants used in Mexican traditional
medicine for the treatment of infectious diseases. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1996,
53:143–147.
24. Fitzpatrick FK. Plant substances active against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Antibiotics
and Chemotherapy, 1954, 4:528.
25. Cacerea A et al. Plants used in Guatemala for the treatment of dermatophytic infections. Screening for antimycotic activity of 44 plant extracts. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1991, 31:263–276.
26. May G, Willuhn G. Antiviral activity of aqueous extracts from medicinal plants in
tissue cultures. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1978, 28:1–7.
27. Brandao M et al. Antimalarial experimental chemotherapy using natural products.
Ciência e Cultura Sociedad Brasileira para o Progresso da Ciência, 1985, 37:1152–1163.
28. Spencer CF et al. Survey of plants for antimalarial activity. Lloydia, 1947, 10:145–
174.

112

Folium Eucalypti
29. Swanson-Flatt SK et al. Traditional plant treatments for diabetes. Studies in normal
and streptozotocin-diabetic mice. Diabetologia, 1990, 33:462–464.
30. Lin YC et al. Studies on the hypoglycemic activity of the medical herbs. Formosan
Medical Association, 1964, 63:400–404.
31. Perez RM et al. A study of the hypoglycemic effect of some Mexican plants. Journal
of Ethnopharmacology, 1984, 12:253–262.
32. Corrigan D. Eucalyptus species. In: DeSmet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse reactions of
herbal drugs. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1992:125–133.
33. Schimmer O et al. An evaluation of 55 commercial plant extracts in the Ames mutagenicity test. Pharmazie, 1994, 49:448–451.
34. Pages N et al. The essential oils and their potential teratogenic properties: example
of the essential oils of Eucalyptus globulus preliminary study with mice. Plantes
médicinales et Phytotherapie, 1990, 24:21–26.
35. Jori A, Briatico G. Effects of eucalyptol on microsomal enzyme activity of foetal and
newborn rats. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1973, 22:543–544.
36. Mitchell J, Rook J. Botanical dermatology. Vancouver, Greengrass, 1979:484–486.

113

Cortex Frangulae

Definition
Cortex Frangulae consists of the dried bark of the stem and branches of
Rhamnus frangula L. (Rhamnaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Frangula alnus Mill., F. frangula (L.) Karst., F. vulgaris Borgh., Rhamnus alnus Mill.,
R. korolkowii Hort. Rehd., R. nemoralis Salisb., R. pentapetala Gilib. Ortega
(1, 2, 4).

Selected vernacular names
Alder buck, alder buckthorn, alder dogwood, alno nero, alqueshra almoqadassa,
amieiro preto, Amselbaum, arrow-wood, awsag aswad, bird cherry, black
alder, black alder bark, black dog wood, bois à poudre, bois noir, bourdaine,
Brechwegdorn, buckthorn, buckthorn bark, casca de amiero, corteccia di
frangola, cortex frangulae, Cortex rhamni frangulae, corteza de arraclau, corteza
de frangula, dog wood, écorce d’aune noir, écorce de bourdaine, écorce de
frangule, Faulbaum, frangola, frangula, Gelbholzrinde, Glatter Wegdorn,
glossy buckthorn, Grindholz, krusinnik, kulit frangula, kutyabengekéreg,
Pulverholz, Pulverholzrinde, purging buckthorn, quishrul awsagel aswad,
rhamnusbast, Schwarzholz, seyah-tusseh, shagrat hhabb esh shung, siâhtouseh, Spillbaum, sporkenhoutbast, vuilboombast, Zapfenholz, Zweckenholz
(1, 4–7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to Mediterranean countries and temperate regions of Africa,
western Asia and Europe (1, 8).

Description
A shrub, 3–5 m high with non-thorny stalks and dark-red to purplishblue young branches spotted with greenish lenticels. Leaves alternate and
ovate, entire or slightly sinuate along the margin, and have parallel secondary veins which curve as they meet the edge of the blade. Flowers small,
greenish-white, hermaphrodite, pentamerous, arranged in axillary clusters of
114

Cortex Frangulae
2–3. Fruit a drupe, red at first, then black at maturity, with 2 or 3 seeds (1, 9,
10).

Plant material of interest: dried bark
The fresh bark contains free anthrones and must be stored for at least
1 year or artificially aged by heat or aeration before therapeutic use
(1, 11, 12).

General appearance
Single or double quills, rarely in channelled pieces; usually 15 cm long, 0.5–
2 cm wide and extremely thin (not more than 2 mm thick). Outer surface
greyish-brown or purplish-black, wrinkled, with numerous transversely elongated whitish lenticels; sometimes bearing patches of foliaceous lichen, with
small black apothecia; when gently scratched, crimson colour of inner layers of
cork becomes evident. Inner surface reddish-yellow to dark brown; fine longitudinal striations, becoming red when moistened with dilute solutions of alkali
(Bornträger’s test). Fracture, short in the outer part and slightly fibrous in the
inner part (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic; taste: sweetish then slightly bitter and astringent;
mucilaginous (1, 8).

Microscopic characteristics
Cortex yellowish-brown, consisting of thin-walled parenchyma, containing
scattered cluster crystals of calcium oxalate and few small starch grains, and
showing large cells filled with mucilage and few groups of slightly lignified
fibres, each up to 40 mm wide. Phloem yellowish-brown, traversed by numerous, somewhat wavy medullary rays, 1–3 cells wide and 10–25 cells high, and
showing numerous tangential groups of strongly lignified bast fibres, accompanied by prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, forming a crystal sheath around
each group; individual fibres 12–24 mm in diameter (1).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-brown. Fragments of reddish-brown cork; fragments of groups of
lignified bast fibres, accompanied by a calcium oxalate crystal sheath; occasional fragments of slightly lignified fibres; fragments showing cells of
medullary rays, with yellow contents which turn red with solutions of alkali
or with sodium hypochlorite solution; cluster crystals of calcium oxalate, 10–
25 mm in diameter; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, 7–15 mm long; few
starch grains 3–10 mm in diameter; sclereid cells absent (1, 2).
115

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

General identity tests
Macroscopic, microscopic and microchemical (Bornträger’s test) examinations
and thin-layer chromatography for characteristic hydroxyanthracene glycosides
(1, 2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (13).

Foreign matter
Not more than 1% (2).

Total ash
Not more than 6% (2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (14). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (14), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13) and
pesticide residues (15).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (13) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash, water-soluble extractive and alcohol-soluble extractive
tests to be established in accordance with national requirements.
116

Cortex Frangulae

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 7.0% of glucofrangulins, calculated as glucofrangulin A,
determined by spectrophotometry at 515 nm (2). The high-performance liquid
chromatography method reported for quantitative analysis of cascarosides (16)
can also be considered.

Major chemical constituents
The active constituents are hydroxyanthraquinone glycosides (3–8%) consisting of monoglycosides and diglycosides of frangula emodin, with the diglycosides, glucofrangulins A and B, being the major compounds. The major
monoglucosides are frangulins A and B (17). Other anthranoid derivatives
present include emodin anthrone-6-O-rhamnoside (franguloside), as well as
physcion and chrysophanol in glycosidic and aglycone forms (17, 18). In the
fresh bark, anthraquinones are not present, but exist as their reduced anthrone
and dianthrone glycosides, which are converted by oxidation during drying and
storage, or by accelerated heat and air treatment (4, 6, 8, 9, 17). The structures
of the major anthraquinone glycosides, free anthraquinones and frangula
emodin anthrone are presented below.

OH

O

O

R1

H3C

O
R2

O

frangula emodin
frangulin A
glucofrangulin A
frangulin B
glucofrangulin B

R1
H
H
Glc
H
Glc

O

HO

R2
H
Rha
Rha
Api
Api

HO

Api =

HO

O
Glc

OH

=

Rha

=

O
CH3

HO
OH

OH

OH

D-apio -β -D-furanosyl

β -D-glucopyranosyl

OH

O

HO

OH

6-deoxy-α -L-mannopyranosyl

OH
frangula emodin anthrone

H3C

OH

117

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Short-term treatment of occasional constipation (1, 9–11). As a single dose, for
total intestinal evacuation before X-rays and other diagnostic examinations
when electrolyte solutions alone are insufficient for adequate evacuation or the
use of electrolyte solutions is not possible (11).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As a cathartic (1).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Internally for treatment of diabetes and externally for skin irritations (6).

Experimental pharmacology
Laxative effects
The pharmacological effects of Cortex Frangulae are associated with the
hydroxyanthraquinone glycosides, glucofrangulins A and B, and frangulins A
and B (17). After oral administration of Cortex Frangulae, the hydroxyanthracene glycosides are not absorbed in the upper intestine, but are hydrolysed
in the colon by intestinal bacteria to form the pharmacologically active metabolites. These metabolites are partially absorbed in the colon and act as a stimulant and irritant to the gastrointestinal tract, as does senna (11, 18, 19, 20). The
mechanism of action, similar to that of senna, is twofold. Firstly, there is stimulation of colonic motility, resulting in augmented propulsion, and accelerated
colonic transit (which reduces fluid absorption from the faecal mass). Secondly,
there is an increase in paracellular permeability across the colonic mucosa,
probably due to inhibition of sodium/potassium-transporting adenosine
triphosphatase or inhibition of chloride channels (18, 21). The increased permeability results in increased water content in the colon (11, 21).
The laxative effect of Cortex Frangulae is not generally observed until 6–8
hours after oral administration. Hydroxyanthracene glycosides are excreted
predominantly in the faeces but are also excreted to some extent in urine, producing an orange colour; anthrones and anthranols will also pass into breast
milk (18).
Toxicity and overdose
As with other anthraquinone laxatives, the major symptoms of overdose are
gripes and severe diarrhoea with consequent loss of fluid and electrolytes (22).
Treatment of overdose should be supportive with generous amounts of fluid.
Electrolyte levels should be monitored, particularly those of potassium. This is
especially important in children and the elderly (22).
118

Cortex Frangulae

Clinical pharmacology
None.

Contraindications
Cortex Frangulae should not be administered to patients with intestinal
obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflammatory diseases of the colon (such as
ulcerative colitis, irritable bowel syndrome, Crohn disease), appendicitis, severe
dehydration with water and electrolyte depletion, or chronic constipation (9,
19, 23). As with other stimulant laxatives, Cortex Frangulae is contraindicated
in patients with cramps, colic, haemorrhoids, nephritis, or any undiagnosed
abdominal symptoms such as abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting (22). Cortex
Frangulae and other anthranoid laxatives are contraindicated during pregnancy because of their pronounced action on the large intestine and the lack of
data on their toxicology (24, 25). As anthranoid metabolites may appear in
breast milk, Cortex Frangulae should not be used during lactation, since there
are insufficient data to assess the potential for pharmacological effects in the
breastfed infant (25). Use of Cortex Frangulae for children under the age of 12
years is contraindicated (11).

Warnings
Cortex Frangulae should only be used if no effect can be obtained through a
change of diet or by the use of bulk-forming laxatives. Patients should also be
warned that certain constituents of the bark are excreted by the kidney and
may colour the urine orange, which is harmless. Cortex Frangulae and other
stimulant laxatives should not be used by patients with abdominal pain, nausea
or vomiting. The use of stimulant laxatives for longer than 2 weeks requires
medical supervision. Rectal bleeding or failure to have a bowel movement after
taking a laxative may indicate a serious condition. Chronic use may result in
aggravation of constipation with laxative dependence and need for increased
dosages, and disturbances of water and electrolyte balance (e.g. hypokalaemia).
Chronic use may also lead to colonic dysfunction (atonicity) and melanotic pigmentation of the colonic mucosa (pseudomelanosis coli), which is harmless
(22). Laxative abuse resulting in diarrhoea and consequent fluid and electrolyte
losses (mainly of potassium) may cause albuminuria, haematuria, and cardiac
and neuromuscular dysfunction. Neuromuscular dysfunction may arise particularly in the case of concomitant use of cardiotonic glycosides (e.g. digoxin,
digitalis and strophanthin), diuretics, corticosteroids or liquorice root (22).

Precautions
General
Cortex Frangulae and other laxatives containing anthraquinone glycosides
should not be used continuously for longer than 1–2 weeks, because of the
possibility of electrolyte imbalance (22).
119

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Drug interactions
Increased intestinal transit time may result in reduced absorption of orally
administered drugs (26). Electrolyte imbalances, such as hypokalaemia, may
potentiate the effects of cardiotonic glycosides (e.g. digoxin, digitalis and strophanthus). Hypokalaemia resulting from long-term laxative abuse can also
potentiate the effects of antiarrhythmic drugs (e.g. quinidine) that change sinus
rhythm by affecting potassium channels. Hypokalaemia caused by drugs such
as thiazide diuretics, adrenocorticosteroids or liquorice root may be exacerbated, and imbalance of other electrolytes may be aggravated (11).

Drug and laboratory test interactions
Anthranoid metabolites may not be detectable in faeces or urine by standard
methods. Thus faecal excretion measurements may not be reliable (26). Urinary
excretion of certain anthranoid metabolites may cause discoloration of the urine
which is not clinically relevant, but may cause false positives in urinary urobilinogen tests and in estrogen measurements using the Kober procedure (27).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Although chronic use of anthranoid-containing laxatives has been hypothesized to play a role in colorectal cancer, no causal relationship has been
demonstrated (28–31).
Various Cortex Frangulae extracts have been shown to be genotoxic in
several in vitro systems, resulting in bacterial mutation, and chromosomal aberration and DNA-repair defects in mammalian cells. However, no mutagenicity
was observed in a gene mutation assay in mammalian cells (23). Frangula
emodin was mutagenic in the Salmonella/microsome assay with S. typhimurium
strain TA1537 only, but gave inconsistent results in gene mutation assays in
mammalian cells. Frangula emodin was also a strong inducer of unscheduled
DNA synthesis in primary rat hepatocytes, but gave negative results in the
sister chromatid exchange assay (18, 23, 32, 33).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
The teratogenic effects of Cortex Frangulae have not been evaluated. (See also
Contraindications.)

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.
120

Cortex Frangulae

Adverse reactions
Single doses of Cortex Frangulae may result in cramp-like discomfort of the
gastrointestinal tract, which may require a reduction of dosage (11). Overdose
can lead to colicky abdominal spasms and pain, as well as the formation of
thin, watery stools.
Long-term laxative abuse may lead to electrolyte imbalance (hypokalaemia
and hypocalcaemia being the most important), metabolic acidosis, malabsorption of nutrients, weight loss, albuminuria and haematuria (34, 35). Weakness
and orthostatic hypotension may be exacerbated in elderly patients when stimulant laxatives are repeatedly used. Secondary aldosteronism may occur due to
renal tubular damage after prolonged use. Steatorrhoea and protein-losing
gastroenteropathy with hypoalbuminaemia have also been reported in laxative abuse (36). Pseudomelanosis coli has been observed in individuals taking
anthraquinone laxatives for extended time periods (22, 35). The pigmentation
is harmless and usually reversible within 4–12 months after the drug is discontinued (35). Conflicting data exist on other toxic effects after long-term use
such as damage to the autonomous nervous system of the colon (35, 37). In
incontinent patients using anthranoid laxatives, prolonged exposure of the skin
to faeces may cause skin damage (38).
Use of the fresh bark of Rhamnus frangula may cause severe vomiting, with
possible abdominal spasms (18).

Dosage forms
Finely cut and powdered crude drug, powder, dried extract, liquid and solid
preparations (8). Store in a tightly closed, light-resistant container for a
maximum of 3 years (1, 2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
The correct dosage for the treatment of occasional constipation is the smallest
dosage necessary to maintain a soft stool. Daily dosage: 0.5–2.5 g crude drug
taken directly or in a decoction; 0.5–2.5 ml 25% ethanol extract (18); all preparations standardized to contain 20–30 mg hydroxyanthracene derivatives calculated as glucofrangulin A (11); taken at bedtime, or in two divided doses, one
in the morning and one at bedtime.

References
1. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
2. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
3. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.

121

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names in Latin, Arabic, Armenian,
English, French, German, Italian and Turkish languages. Cairo, Argus & Papazian Press,
1936.
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, July 8, 1998 production (an online database available directly through
the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network
[STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
7. Leung AY, Foster S. Encyclopedia of common natural ingredients used in food, drugs, and
cosmetics, 2nd ed. New York, NY, John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
8. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
1994:463–469.
9. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
10. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
11. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
12. Tyler VE, Bradley LR, Robbers JE, eds. Pharmacognosy, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Lea
and Febiger, 1988:62–63.
13. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
14. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
15. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
16. De Witte P, Cuveele J, Lemli J. Determination of bicascarosides in cascara fluid
extract by high-performance liquid chromatography. Journal of Liquid Chromatography, 1991, 14:2201–2206.
17. Westendorf J. Anthranoid derivatives—Rhamnus species. In: De Smet PAGM et al.,
eds. Adverse effects of herbal drugs. Vol. 2. Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 1993:129–131.
18. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Bournemouth, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992.
19. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 30th ed. London, The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
20. WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Vol. I. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1999.
21. De Witte P. Metabolism and pharmacokinetics of the anthranoids. Pharmacology,
1993, 47 (Suppl. 1):86–97.
22. Hardman JG, Limbird LE, eds. Goodman and Gilman’s The pharmacological basis of
therapeutics, 9th ed. New York, McGraw–Hill, 1996.
23. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 5. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1997.
24. Lewis JH, Weingold AB. The use of gastrointestinal drugs during pregnancy and
lactation. American Journal of Gastroenterology, 1985, 80:912–923.
25. Physician’s Desk Reference. Montvale, NJ, Medical Economics, 1998.
26. American Hospital Formulary Service. Bethesda, MD, American Society of Hospital
Pharmacists, 1990.
27. The United States pharmacopeia: dispensing information. Rockville, MD, The United
States Pharmacopeia Convention, 1992.
28. Loew D. Pseudomelanosis coli durch Anthranoide. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1994,
16:312–318.
29. Patel PM et al. Anthraquinone laxatives and human cancer. Postgraduate Medical
Journal, 1989, 65:216–217.
30. Siegers CP. Anthranoid laxatives and colorectal cancer. Trends in Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1992, 13:229–231.

122

Cortex Frangulae
31. Siegers CP et al. Anthranoid laxative abuse—a risk for colorectal cancer? Gut, 1993,
34:1099–1101.
32. Westendorf J et al. Possible carcinogenicity of anthraquinone-containing medical
plants. Planta Medica, 1988, 54:562.
33. Westendorf J et al. Genotoxicity of naturally occurring hydroxyanthraquinones.
Mutation Research, 1990, 240:1–12.
34. Godding EW. Therapeutics of laxative agents with special reference to the
anthraquinones. Pharmacology, 1976, 14 (Suppl. 1):78–101.
35. Muller-Lissner SA. Adverse effects of laxatives: facts and fiction. Pharmacology, 1993,
47 (Suppl. 1):138–145.
36. Heizer WD et al. Protein-losing gastroenteropathy and malabsorption associated
with factitious diarrhoea. Annals of Internal Medicine, 1968, 68:839–852.
37. Kune GA. Laxative use not a risk for colorectal cancer: data from the Melbourne
colorectal cancer study. Zeitschrift für Gastroenterologie, 1993, 31:140–143.
38. Helwig H, Mund P. Akute Hautschädigung durch “X-Prep”. Monatsschrift Kinderheilkunde, 1986, 134:164.

123

Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis

Definition
Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis consists of the dried or fresh leaves and/or the
dried bark of Hamamelis virginiana L. (Hamamelidaceae).
Folium Hamamelidis consists of the dried (1, 2) or fresh leaves (3), and
Cortex Hamamelidis consists of the dried bark of the trunk and twigs of
Hamamelis virginiana L. (2, 4).

Synonyms
Hamamelis androgyna Walt., H. caroliniana Walt., H. corylifolia Moench., H. dentata
Moench., H. dioica Walt., H. estivalis Raf., H. macrophylla Pursh., H. nigra Raf.,
H. parvifolia Raf., H. rotundifolia Raf., H. virginata sic, H. virginiae L., H. virginiana
ssp. parvifolia Nutt., H. virginica L., Trilopus dentata Raf., T. estivalis Raf., T. nigra
Raf., T. parvifolia Raf., T. rotundifolia Raf., T. virginica Raf. (5, 6).

Selected vernacular names
Amamelide, Amerikamansaku, cortice de hamamelis, feuilles d’hamamélis,
feuilles du noisetier de la sorcière, folhas de hamamelis, hamamelis, hamamélis
de virginie, Hexenhasel, magician’s rod, noisetier de sorcière, oczar, pistachio
nut, snapping hazelnut, spotted alders, striped alder, tobacco wood, varázsdió
levél és kéreg, vilin virginsky, virginische Zaubernuss, virginischer Zauberstrauch, white hazel, winter bloom, witch hazel, Zauberhasel, Zaubernuss
(5–8).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to the Atlantic coast of North America, found in damp woods
ranging from Nova Scotia to Florida and as far west as Texas (6, 8, 9).

Description
A tall shrub or small tree, up to 4.6 m high. Branches highly branched. Leaves
alternate, stipulate, short-petioled, unequilaterally ovate or rhomboid-ovate,
with oblique base and sinuate or sinuate-dentate margin. Flowers thread-like,
golden-yellow; appear in axillary clusters as leaves fall in autumn and at about
the same time as fruits ripen from blossoms of the previous year. Fruit a
124

Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis
2-beaked, 2-celled, woody capsule dehiscing loculicidally from the top, each
cell containing a single black seed (8, 10, 11).

Plant material of interest: dried and fresh leaves, dried
bark
General appearance
Folium
Green or greenish-brown, often broken, crumpled and compressed into more
or less compact masses. Lamina 5–12 cm long, 3–8 cm wide, broadly ovate to
obovate; base oblique and asymmetric; apex acute or, rarely, obtuse; margins
of lamina roughly crenate or dentate. Venation pinnate and prominent on the
abaxial surface; usually 4–6 pairs of secondary veins attached to main vein,
leaving at an acute angle and curving gently to marginal points where there are
fine veins often at right angles to secondary veins (1).
Cortex
Channelled, seldom quilled or in strips, up to 3 cm wide and 2 mm thick. Outer
surface light yellowish-brown or reddish-brown, has thin, whitish or greyishbrown cork with numerous lenticels; inner surface yellowish-brown to reddishbrown, longitudinally striated. Fracture splintery and fibrous (9).

Organoleptic properties
Folium
Odour: slight; taste: astringent, slightly aromatic, bitter (8).
Cortex
Odourless; taste: strongly astringent, slightly bitter (2, 9).

Microscopic characteristics
Folium
Upper epidermis of leaf composed of slightly elongated cells with straight to
slightly sinuous walls; walls moderately and sometimes unevenly thickened;
no stomata; underlying palisade cells fairly small and distinct. Lower epidermis
composed of polygonal cells with very sinuous outline; walls thinner and more
uniform than those of upper epidermis; paracytic stomata fairly numerous but
rather faint and indistinct; underlying cells of spongy mesophyll frequently
brown, appear as clearly defined honeycomb network. Covering trichomes
characteristic, stellate, found fragmented, occasionally entire, composed of
4–12 elongated, conical cells united at their bases to form a radiating structure;
each cell has moderately and slightly unevenly thickened wall which is slightly
lignified. Linear idioblasts, composed of lignified cells, found scattered across
125

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
entire thickness of lamina. Prismatic calcium oxalate crystals scattered, occasionally found in clusters, as well as forming a sheath (12).
Cortex
Sclereids abundant, vary considerably in size, are of 2 types: rounded to oval,
or subrectangular; heavily thickened, usually in groups of just 2 or 3 cells, but
smaller cells often form larger groups; walls have numerous, conspicuous
branched pits and striations, particularly in the larger cells; other type of sclereids more regular in size and form, frequently found associated with the cork,
occurring as a layer of small, polygonal cells with no intercellular spaces. Fibres
occur in groups surrounded by a sheath of prismatic calcium oxalate crystals;
individual fibres very thick-walled and lignified with indistinct lumen with
calcium oxalate prismatic crystals scattered as well as in the parenchyma surrounding the fibres. Crystals also occasionally found associated with thickerwalled sclereids; crystals fairly uniform in size, although a few very large prisms
may occur. Parenchyma cells thin-walled, several filled with dark brown contents. Medullary rays uniseriate, composed of rounded cells with slightly thickened walls. Cork cells thin-walled and polygonal. Fragments of lignified xylem
tissue from adherent wood infrequent and consist of narrow tracheids with
conspicuous bordered pits, accompanied by thin-walled fibres and pitted
medullary ray cells. Starch grains rare; a few small, spherical grains may be
found in some parenchymatous cells (12).

Powdered plant material
Folium
Brownish-green; fragments of adaxial epidermis with wavy anticlinal walls;
abaxial epidermis with stomata, some paracytic, others atypical; covering trichomes, stellate, either entire or broken, composed of 4–12 cells united at their
bases; cells elongated and conical, usually up to 250 mm long, thick-walled with
clearly visible lumen with often brown contents. Fibres lignified and thickwalled, isolated or in groups; accompanied by sheath of prismatic calcium
oxalate crystals. Parenchymatous palisade cells small and cylindrical; irregularshaped cells of spongy mesophyll; sclereids, frequently enlarged at one or both
ends, 150–180 mm long, whole or fragmented; fragments of annular or spiral
vessels; isolated prismatic calcium oxalate crystals (1).
Cortex
Masses of brownish or yellowish cork cells, some lignified; groups of
parenchyma cells with tannin or small starch grains; strands of lignified bast;
tracheae with bordered pores; strongly lignified wood fibres with slit-like or
bordered pores; crystal fibres containing monoclinic prismatic calcium oxalate
crystals (up to 40 mm in length) (13).

126

Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1), thin-layer chromatography (1,
2) and high-performance liquid chromatography (5) for characteristic tannin
constituents.

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (14).

Foreign organic matter
Folium
Not more than 7% stems, and not more than 2% other foreign matter (1).
Cortex
Not more than 2% foreign matter (2, 4).

Total ash
Folium
Not more than 7% (1).
Cortex
Not more than 6% (2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Folium
Not more than 2% (1).
Cortex
Not more than 1.5% (2).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Folium
To be established in accordance with national requirements.
Cortex
Not less than 20% using 45% alcohol (2).

127

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Loss on drying
Folium
Not more than 10% (1).
Cortex
Not more than 12% (4).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (15), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14) and
pesticide residues (16).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (14) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Folium and Cortex
Chemical, sulfated ash and water-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.
Folium
Alcohol-soluble extractive test to be established in accordance with national
requirements.

Chemical assays
Folium: contains not less than 3% tannins (1). Cortex: contains not less than
4% tannins (4). Thin-layer chromatography is used for qualitative and quantitative analysis of tannins (1). A high-performance liquid chromatography
method for quantitative analysis of condensed and hydrolysable tannins has
been developed (17, 18).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents of the dried leaf and bark are tannins (up to 10%). Both
hydrolysable and condensed tannins are present, with the latter predominating
(9, 11, 19). Folium tannins are a mixture of gallic acid (10%), hydrolysable
128

Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis
hamamelitannin (1.5%) and condensed proanthocyanidins (88.5%) (17). Cortex
tannins are similar qualitatively, but have a much higher hamamelitannin level
(up to 65% of a hydroalcoholic extract) (11).
The structures of gallic acid, hamamelitannin and condensed proanthocyanidins are presented below.

CO2H

HO

OH

HO
O

H

OH

HO
OH

HO

gallic acid

OH
O

HO
OH

OH

O

O

HO

O
OH O

O
OH

OH

hamamelitannin

H

OH

OH

O

HO

OH
R

n

OH

HO
OH

HO

R
OH

HO

H

OH

OH
R

proanthocyanidins
procyanidin
n = 0, R = H
prodelphinidin n = 0, R = OH

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Topically for minor skin lesions, bruises and sprains (3, 5, 20), local inflammation of the skin and mucous membranes (3, 5, 20–24), haemorrhoids (3, 5, 20,
25–28) and varicose veins (3).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Topically as a haemostat (27).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of colitis, diarrhoea, dysentery, dysmenorrhoea, eye inflammations,
haematuria, kidney pains, neuralgia, nosebleeds and excessive menstruation.
Also as a tonic (6, 7, 19).
129

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Astringent activity
The phenolic constituents of Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis, particularly
the tannins (e.g. hamamelitannin), aldehydes and oligomeric proanthocyanidins, are responsible for its astringent activity (6, 18, 29, 30). Similar to other
astringent drugs, application of Hamamelidis1 preparations to the skin and
mucosa in low concentrations sealed cell membranes and reduced capillary
permeability (6, 30). Higher concentrations precipitated proteins and thickened
colloidal tissue, forming a thin membrane in the wound region, and slightly
compressed the skin tissue beneath it (6). Alcohol extracts of Hamamelidis
had strong astringent action, with the bark extract being slightly superior to the
leaf extract (31).
The healing effect of Hamamelidis distillate was compared with hydrogen
peroxide on skin damaged by application of dichlorodiethyl sulfide (mustard
gas) in various animal models. The distillate was more effective than hydrogen
peroxide in reducing the occurrence of pus in the affected skin areas. Furthermore, subsequent treatment of the purulent skin areas with a 20% Hamamelidis ointment reduced the incidence of suppuration as compared with
hydrogen peroxide treatment (6, 32).
Venotonic activity
The venotonic effects of leaf preparations (steam distillate, tincture or alcohol
extract) were tested by measuring the blood supply to the rear paw of rabbits
(33). A decrease in blood supply was observed after intra-arterial administration of the distillate. This effect was not influenced by concomitant administration of adrenergic, adrenolytic or myotonic drugs (33–35).
Antibacterial activity
An aqueous extract of the leaves inhibited the growth in vitro of Escherichia
coli (MIC 0.4 mg/ml), Staphylococcus aureus (MIC 0.4 mg/ml), Bacillus subtilis (MIC
1.1 mg/ml) and Enterococcus faecalis (MIC 3.0 mg/ml). Aqueous extracts of the
bark inhibited the growth in vitro of Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis and Enterococcus faecalis (MIC for all 10.0 mg/ml) (36).
Antioxidant activity
Hamamelitannin inhibited the production of superoxide anion radicals (IC50
1.38 mmol/l) and hydroxyl radicals (IC50 5.46 mmol/l), as measured by electron
spin resonance spectrometry (37, 38). Hamamelitannin also suppressed the
depolymerization of hyaluronic acid and protected human dermal fibroblasts
against damage induced by superoxide anion radicals (at concentrations of
1

Refers to Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis.

130

Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis
1 mmol/l and 10 mmol/l, respectively) (37). Hamamelitannin and gallic acid protected murine dermal fibroblasts against damage induced by superoxide anion
radicals (IC50 1.31 mmol/l and 1.01 mmol/l, respectively) (38). Both tannins had
free radical scavenging activity. For superoxide anion scavenging, the IC50 was
1.31 mmol/l for hamamelitannin and 1.01 mmol/l for gallic acid, compared with
23.31 mmol/l for ascorbic acid. For hydroxyl radical scavenging, the IC50 was
5.46 mmol/l for hamamelitannin and 78.04 mmol/l for gallic acid. For singlet
oxygen scavenging, the IC50 was 45.51 mmol/l for hamamelitannin and
69.81 mmol/l for gallic acid (39).

Anti-inflammatory activity
Hamamelidis extracts and isolated chemical constituents have antiinflammatory activity both in vitro and in vivo. Intraperitoneal administration
of a 70% ethanol extract of the leaves (200 mg/kg body weight) significantly
inhibited the chronic phase of carrageenan-induced rat footpad oedema (40).
Hamamelitannin and galloylated proanthocyanidins isolated from Hamamelidis are potent inhibitors of 5-lipoxygenase (IC50 range 1.0–18.7 mg/ml). Topical
application of a hydroalcoholic extract of the bark (250 mg/ml) inhibited croton
oil-induced ear oedema in mice. In addition to anti-inflammatory activity, this
study demonstrated that the proanthocyanidin fraction of the hydroalcoholic
extract was active against herpes simplex virus type 1 (ED50 11 mg/ml), and also
inhibited a-glucosidase (ED50 0.35 mg/ml) and human leukocyte elastase (ED50
1.4 mg/ml) (41).

Clinical pharmacology
Anorectal complaints
The astringent properties of Hamamelidis extracts have led to their use in
ointments and suppositories for the treatment of anorectal complaints, such as
haemorrhoids (25–27). In a clinical study without controls of 75 patients with
acute stage 1 haemorrhoidal symptoms, the efficacy of rectal ointments
containing either a Hamamelidis fluidextract or bismuth subgallate was assessed.
After application of either ointment twice daily for 3 days, significant
improvement was observed in pruritus, burning sensation and pain (P < 0.001).
Marked recovery was noted after 3 weeks of therapy (25). A randomized,
double-blind trial compared the efficacy of rectal ointments containing either a
Hamamelidis fluidextract, bismuth subgallate or a local anaesthetic in the treatment of 90 patients with acute stage 1 haemorrhoidal symptoms. The local
anaesthetic was present in two control ointments which also contained either
policresulen or fluocinolone acetonide. After 21 days of treatment, all four ointments were equally effective in improving pruritus, bleeding, burning sensation and pain (26).
The efficacy of a Hamamelidis ointment containing 25 g aqueous distillate/100 g ointment base (equivalent to about 4 g drug) was compared to a
Hamamelidis reference preparation in a study without controls of 70 patients
131

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
with various anorectal complaints. Preparations were applied to the affected
skin or transitional mucosa three times daily either alone or in combination
with sclerotherapy. After 4 weeks of treatment, symptoms such as pruritus,
burning sensation and pain were eliminated in 60% of the patients treated with
the Hamamelidis ointment (28).
Anti-inflammatory activity
The anti-inflammatory efficacy of an aftersun lotion containing 10% Aqua
Hamamelidis was compared with that of two Hamamelidis-free aftersun
lotions in 30 healthy volunteers. Each volunteer received four doses of ultraviolet B in a modified ultraviolet B erythema test. Chromametry and visual
scoring were used to determine the degree of erythema at 7, 24 and 48 hours
after irradiation. The lotion containing Hamamelidis suppressed erythema by
20% at 7 hours and by 27% at 48 hours, whereas the degree of suppression
seen with the Hamamelidis-free lotions was 11% and 15%, respectively (42).
A randomized, double-blind study of 48 patients assessed the antiinflammatory efficacy of topical application of a Hamamelidis distillate in a
phospholipid-containing vehicle, hydrocortisone, camomile and four drug-free
vehicle-based preparations. Erythema induced by ultraviolet light or repeated
stripping of the skin with adhesive tape was suppressed only by the Hamamelidis preparation (0.64 mg or 2.5 mg Hamamelidis ketone per 100 g vehicle) and
hydrocortisone cream (1%). However, the hydrocortisone cream was superior
to all other preparations tested (21).
Vasoconstriction
A randomized, placebo-controlled study assessed the vasoconstrictive effects
of an aqueous propylene glycol extract of Hamamelidis in 30 healthy volunteers. The extract produced a reduction in skin temperature as compared with
the placebo (6, 43). The anti-inflammatory effects of a Hamamelidis ointment
containing 25 g aqueous distillate/100 g ointment base (about 4 g drug) were
analysed in five patients with dermatoses and 22 healthy volunteers. Fluvography measurements indicated that in both groups the ointment reduced the
thermal conductivity of the skin due to vasoconstriction, suggesting a mild antiinflammatory activity. These data were confirmed by transcutaneous oxygen
measurements (44).
Eczema
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial compared the efficacy of
three creams containing either a Hamamelidis distillate, 0.5% hydrocortisone or
a drug-free vehicle in the symptomatic treatment of 72 patients with moderately
severe atopic eczema. All treatments reduced the incidence of itching, scaling
and erythema after 1 week of treatment: the cream containing Hamamelidis distillate was no more effective than that containing the placebo (45).
132

Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis
The efficacy of two Hamamelidis ointments (differing only in the ointment
base), containing 25 g aqueous distillate/100 g ointment base (equivalent to
about 4 g drug), for the treatment of endogenous eczema (neurodermatitis)
and toxic degenerative eczema (attrition eczema) was compared in a placebocontrolled, double-blind study (the placebo was not described). Symptomatic
improvements in itching, redness, burning sensation and desquamation of the
skin were observed in the 36 patients with endogenous eczema (neurodermatitis) with both Hamamelidis preparations after treatment for 39 days.
Eighty patients with toxic degenerative eczema (attrition eczema) treated
with the Hamamelidis ointments showed improvements in rough skin,
redness, burning sensation and desquamation of the skin after 28 days of
treatment (23).
A randomized, double-blind comparison study assessed the efficacy of
ointments containing either a standardized extract of the dried leaves or
bufexamac in the treatment of 22 patients with bilateral, moderately
severe endogenous eczema (neurodermatitis). Patients were treated three
times daily for an average of 17 days. Comparison of the patients’ forearms
showed that both treatments reduced the severity of symptoms such as desquamation of the skin, redness, itching and lichenification, with desquamation
showing the highest reduction (55%). No differences were observed in the
global assessment of the therapy or the severity of symptoms between
treatments (24).
In a pilot study of 37 patients with endogenous eczema (neurodermatitis),
a cream containing a Hamamelidis leaf extract was applied twice daily for
2 weeks. Following treatment, considerable improvement in symptoms such as
inflammation and itching was noted in 24 patients (46).
Analgesic activity
In a randomized clinical trial involving 266 patients undergoing episiotomy, the
efficacy of three analgesic treatments was investigated to determine their
effects on pain, bruising and oedematous swelling. The treatments tested were
local application of: a cream containing Hamamelidis water BPC 1973; a reference cream containing 1% hydrocortisone and a local anaesthetic; and ice
packs. Oral paracetamol and salt baths were also used as needed. The efficacy
of all three analgesic treatments appeared to be equal (22).
Antiviral activity
The efficacy and safety of an ointment prepared with a special extract from the
bark was assessed in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study for
the treatment of herpes labialis infection. Thirty-four patients were treated
within 48 hours of recurrence of symptoms, and treatment (daily) lasted for 8
days. By the end of the therapy, the size of the inflamed area was significantly
reduced in patients treated with the Cortex Hamamelidis ointment as compared with placebo treatment (P = 0.022) (47).
133

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Contraindications
No information available.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Aqueous extracts of the dried leaves were not carcinogenic when administered
subcutaneously to rodents (10 mg/animal) (48).

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; teratogenic and nonteratogenic effects in pregnancy; nursing mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore,
Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis should not be administered during pregnancy
or lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Allergic contact dermatitis may occur in sensitive individuals (49, 50).

Dosage forms
Dried leaves and bark for decoctions; steam distillate, ointment and suppositories (3, 9). Fresh leaves and twigs are collected in the spring and early summer
to make a steam distillate (3). Store in a well-closed container, protected from
light (19).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
External use: steam distillate, undiluted or diluted 1 : 3 with water to make poultices; 20–30% in semisolid preparations (3). Extracts: in semisolid and liquid
preparations corresponding to 5–10% of the crude drug (3, 5). Crude drug:
decoctions from 5–10 g to 1 cup (250 ml) water for poultices and wound
irrigation (3, 5). Rectal suppositories: 1–3 times daily the quantity of a preparation corresponding to 0.1–1.0 g crude drug, use Hamamelidis water undiluted
or diluted 1 : 3 with water (3, 5). Other preparations: several times daily, corresponding to 0.1–1.0 g drug in preparations, or witch hazel water undiluted or
diluted with water (3).

References
1. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe,
1999.

134

Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association,
1996.
3. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
4. Deutscher Arzneimittel-Codex. Stuttgart, Govi-Verlag, 1998.
5. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
6. Laux P, Oschmann R. Die Zaubernuss—Hamamelis virginiana L. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1993, 14:155–166.
7. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
8. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston,
1950.
9. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
10. Tyler VE. The honest herbal. New York, NY, Pharmaceutical Product Press, 1993.
11. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
12. Jackson BP, Snowdon DK. Atlas of microscopy of medicinal plants, culinary herbs and
spices. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1990.
13. Gathercoal EN, Wirth EH, eds. Pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1936.
14. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
15. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
17. Vennat B et al. Tannins from Hamamelis virginiana: identification of proanthocyanidins and hamamelitannin quantification in leaf, bark, and stem extracts. Planta
Medica, 1988, 54:454–457.
18. Vennat B et al. Hamamelis virginiana: identification and assay of proanthocyanidins,
phenolic acids and flavonoids in leaf extracts. Pharmaceutica Acta Helvetiae, 1992,
67:11–14.
19. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines: a guide for healthcare professionals. London, The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
20. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 5. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1997.
21. Korting HC et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Hamamelis distillate applied topically to the skin. European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 1993, 44:315–318.
22. Moore W, James DK. A random trial of three topical analgesic agents in the
treatment of episiotomy pain following instrumental vaginal delivery. Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 1989, 10:35–39.
23. Pfister R. Zur Problematik der Behandlung und Nachbehandlung chronischer Dermatosen. Eine klinische Studie über Hametum Salbe. Fortschritte der Medizin, 1981,
99:1264–1268.
24. Swoboda M, Meurer J. Therapie von Neurodermitis mit Hamamelis virginiana Extrakt
in Salbenform. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1991, 12:114–117.
25. Knoch HG. Hämorrhoiden ersten Grades: Wirksamkeit einer Salbe auf pflanzlicher
Basis. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1991, 133:481–484.
26. Knoch HG et al. Salbenbehandlung von Hämorrhoiden ersten Grades. Fortschritte der
Medizin, 1992, 110:135–138.
27. Reynolds JEF, Prasad AB. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 30th ed. London, The
Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
28. Steinhart GP. Anorektale Beschwerden: viele Symptome und was tun? Ärztliche
Praxis, 1982, 34:963–964.

135

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
29. Hänsel R. Phytopharmaka, Grundlagen und Praxis. Vol. 2. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1991.
30. Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie. Berlin, Springer, 1992.
31. Grascza L. Adstringierende Wirkung von Phytopharmaka. Deutsche Apotheker
Zeitung, 1987, 44:2256–2258.
32. Kesser E et al. Therapie von Senfgasschädigungen der Haut. Archives of Experimental
Pathology and Pharmacy, 1936, 180:557.
33. Bernard P et al. Valeur pharmacodynamique toniveineuse des préparations
galéniques à base de feuilles d’Hamamelis. Journal de Pharmacie de Belgique, 1972,
4:505–512.
34. Balansard P et al. Méthode d’étude quantitative de l’action veinotrope. Thérapie,
1970, 25:675–682.
35. Balansard P et al. Action toniveineuse d’un extrait purifié d’Hamamelis virginiana.
Thérapie, 1972, 27:793–799.
36. Brantner A, Grein E. Antibacterial activity of plant extracts used externally in traditional medicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1994, 44:35–40.
37. Masaki H et al. Evaluation of superoxide scavenging activities of Hamamelis extract
and hamamelitannin. Free Radical Research Communications, 1993, 19:333–340.
38. Masaki H et al. Hamamelitannin as a new potent active oxygen scavenger. Phytochemistry, 1994, 37:337–343.
39. Masaki H et al. Protective activity of hamamelitannin on cell damage induced by
superoxide anion radicals in murine dermal fibroblasts. Biological and Pharmaceutical
Bulletin, 1995, 18:59–63.
40. Duwiejua M et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Polygonum bistorta, Guaiacum officinale and Hamamelis virginiana in rats. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1993,
46:286–290.
41. Erdelmeier CAJ et al. Antiviral and antiphlogistic activities of Hamamelis virginiana
bark. Planta Medica, 1996, 62:241–245.
42. Hughes-Formella BJ et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of Hamamelidis lotion in a UVB
erythema test. Dermatology, 1998, 196:316–322.
43. Diemunsch AM, Mathis C. S.T.P. Effet vasoconstricteur de l’hamamélis en application externe. Pharma, 1987, 3:111–114.
44. Sorkin B. Hametumsalbe, eine kortikoidfreie antiinflammatorische Salbe. Physikalische Medizin und Rehabilitation, 1980, 21:53–57.
45. Korting HC et al. Comparative efficacy of Hamamelis distillate and hydrocortisone cream in atopic eczema. European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 1995, 48:
461–465.
46. Wokalek H. Zur Bedeutung epidermaler Lipide und des Arachidonsäurestoffwechsels bei feuilles d’hamamelis. Journal de Pharmacie de Belgique, 1993, 27:
498–506.
47. Baumgärtner M et al. Hamamelis-Spezialextrakt zur lokalen Behandlung des
Herpes labialis, eine plazebokontrollierte Doppelblindstudie. Zeitschrift für Allgemeine
Medizin, 1998, 74:158–161.
48. Kapadia GJ et al. Carcinogenicity of some folk medicinal herbs in rats. Journal of the
National Cancer Institute, 1978, 60:683–686.
49. Bruynzeel DP et al. Contact sensitization by alternative topical medicaments containing plant extracts. Contact Dermatitis, 1992, 27:278–279.
50. Granlund H. Contact allergy to witch hazel. Contact Dermatitis, 1994, 31:195.

136

Semen Hippocastani

Definition
Semen Hippocastani consists of the dried ripe seeds of Aesculus hippocastanum
L. (Hippocastanaceae) (1, 2).

Synonyms
Aesculus castanea Gilib., A. procera Salisb., Castanea equina, Hippocastanum vulgare
Gaertner (3). Not to be confused with the common chestnut, Castanea dentata
(Marshall) Burkh. (Fagaceae) (4) or related Castanea species (5).

Selected vernacular names
Abu farwat el hhussan, castagna amare, castagna cavallina, castagna di cavalle,
castagno d’India, castan, castandas da India, castanheiro da India, castaño de
Indias, chata, châtaignier de cheval, châtaignier de mer, common horse chestnut, conqueror tree, custul, gemeine Kastanie, gemeine Rosskastanie, hippocastani semen, horse chestnut, karu, marronier d’Inde, naru, paardekastanje, Pferdekastanie, qastanah baria, Rosskastanie, seiyo-tochinoki, seiyoutochinoki, semen castaneae equinae, shahbalout-e hendi, vadgesztenyemag,
weisse Rosskastanie, wilde kastanje, wilde kest (3, 6).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to western Asia, is now widely cultivated in parks, gardens and
along city streets of many countries worldwide, including those in Europe, and
the United States of America (7).

Description
A tree, up to 30 m high and 2 m in circumference, with large sticky buds and
dense, broad, usually orbicular, or occasionally pyramidal, crown. Leaves up to
20 cm long and 10 cm wide, with 15–20 cm long petioles; composed of 5–7 large
sessile leaflets, median leaflet largest, outer leaflets much smaller. Blades
obovate or oblong, tapering at the base, abruptly mucronate, irregularly serrate
at the margin; dorsal side glabrous; ventral side with soft hairs. Flowers have
5 petals with an orbicular limb, imbricate at the margins, white, with yellow
spot at base which later turns pink; arranged in erect dense panicles up to 20–
137

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
30 cm long; rachis and pedicel with reddish-brown hairs; calyx cylindrical to
campanulate and pubescent; stamens hairy at the base; ovary covered with soft
hairs and prickles. Capsules spiny, usually with 1 large seed (7).

Plant material of interest: dried ripe seeds
General appearance
Globulous or ovoid, 2–4 cm in diameter. The 2 large cotyledons fleshy, oily and
starchy, often connate with a line of suture more or less visible; covered by a
shiny dark-brown tegument with a large whitish spot corresponding to the
hilum; tegument creamy white in the immature seed, takes on a brown tinge
during maturation, becoming dark brown when mature. Curved radicle occupies a depression either on the commissure of the cotyledons or on the dorsal
side of 1 of the cotyledons (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight; taste: bitter, acrid (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Seed envelope made up of polygonal cells radially oriented in a transverse
section of the seed. Underneath the envelope are numerous layers of sclerenchyma cells with dense, roughly mottled, yellowish-brown thick walls;
loose parenchyma, colourless, consisting of a few layers of cells, with rigid
walls; sparse annulate or spiral vessels. Tissue of the cotyledons made up of
cells with thin, colourless walls, full of starch and lipids. Characteristic starch
grains found singly, either spherical (15–25 mm in diameter) or irregular (pearor kidney-shaped); also numerous small (5–10 mm in diameter), spherical starch
grains and a few grains clustered into groups of 2–4 (1, 2).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-grey. Characteristic starch grains found singly, either spherical (15–
25 mm in diameter) or irregular (pear- or kidney-shaped); also numerous small
(5–10 mm in diameter), spherical starch grains and a few grains clustered into
groups of 2–4. Oil droplets of different sizes; fine fragments of colourless cell
walls from the cotyledons; fragments of seed envelope brownish-yellow; and
parenchyma and roughly mottled sclerenchyma cells (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, and thin-layer chromatography for
the characteristic triterpene saponin, aescin (also known as escin) (1, 2).

138

Semen Hippocastani

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO quality control methods for medicinal plants (8).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 4% (1, 2).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (9). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (9), and the
WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (8) and pesticide residues (10).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (8).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (8) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, acid-insoluble ash, sulfated ash, water-soluble extractive and
alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in accordance with national
requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 3.0% triterpene saponins, calculated as aescin (escin),
determined by spectrophotometry at 540 nm (1, 2). High-performance liquid
chromatography (11) and thin-layer chromatography–densitometry (11, 12)
procedures for the quantitative analysis of triterpene saponins have also been
developed.

139

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are triterpene saponins (up to 10%), collectively referred
to as aescin (also known as escin), and are considered the active therapeutic
principles. Aescin exists in three forms, a-aescin, b-aescin and cryptoaescin,
which are differentiated by their physical properties. b-aescin is a mixture of
more than 30 different glycosides derived from the triterpene aglycones protoaescigenin (also known as protoescigenin) and barringtogenol C. Other constituents include flavonoids (e.g. quercetin, kaempferol and their glycosyl
derivatives) (3, 5, 7). The structures of barringtogenol C and protoaescigenin
are presented below.
CH3

H3C

CH3
H

H
HO
R

CH3

OH
H
H
OH
CH2OH

H

CH3

H

OH

barringtogenol C

R=H

protoaescigenin

R = OH

H
CH3

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Internally, for treatment of symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency, including pain, feeling of heaviness in the legs, nocturnal calf-muscle spasms, itching
and oedema (13–21). Externally, for the symptomatic treatment of chronic
venous insufficiency, sprains and bruises (22–24).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Treatment of coronary heart disease (25).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of bacillary dysentery and fevers. Also as a haemostat for excessive
menstrual or other gynaecological bleeding, and as a tonic (6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-inflammatory activity
Intravenous administration of a 95% ethanol extract of Semen Hippocastani
(0.2–0.4 ml/kg body weight) decreased histamine-induced erythema in guineapigs (26). Intragastric administration of a 30% ethanol extract of the seeds sup140

Semen Hippocastani
pressed carrageenan-induced footpad oedema and adjuvant-induced arthritis
in rats (at doses of 0.6 and 1.5 ml/kg body weight, respectively) (27). Intraperitoneal administration of a saponin fraction isolated from a seed extract
exhibited analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic activities in vivo; the
saponin fraction also inhibited prostaglandin synthetase activity in vitro (28).
Intragastric administration of a hydroalcoholic extract of the seeds to rats (200–
400 mg/kg body weight) suppressed footpad oedema induced by peroxide and
carrageenan (29). Intravenous or oral administration of aescin to rats (0.5–
120 mg/kg body weight) inhibited footpad oedema induced by dextran, and
granuloma induced by cotton pellet and formalin paper (30–32). Intravenous
administration of aescin to rats reduced footpad oedema induced by ovalbumin, formalin and dextran (33, 34).
Vasoactive effects
A hydroalcoholic extract of the seeds induced contractions in canine saphenous
veins in vitro, and an intravenous bolus (25–50 mg) increased venous pressure
in perfused canine saphenous veins in vivo (29).
Cutaneous capillary hyperpermeability induced by chloroform, serotonin
and histamine also decreased in rats and rabbits after intragastric administration of a hydroalcoholic extract of the seeds (50–400 mg/kg body weight) (29).
Aescin (5–10 mg/ml) increased the tension of isolated human saphenous veins
and rabbit portal veins in vitro. The effect was due to preferential formation of
prostaglandin F2a and was reversed by treatment with indometacin (35). The
vasoactive effects of aescin were investigated in isolated peripheral blood
vessels, isolated arteries and veins (constant-flow perfused cat rear paw, isolated perfused carotid artery of the guinea-pig and iliac veins of the pig). Aescin
had a biphasic effect on blood vessels: initial transient dilation was followed
by increased tone, which was long lasting in isolated arteries and veins, but
was transient in isolated peripheral blood vessels (36). Aescin has also been
shown to inhibit hyaluronidase activity in vitro (IC50 149.9 mmol/l) (37). A
hydroalcoholic extract of the seeds (250 mg/ml) reduced lipid peroxidation and
had radical-scavenging properties (IC50 0.24 mg/ml for superoxide dismutase
radicals) (38).

Clinical pharmacology
Chronic venous insufficiency and related conditions
Nine placebo-controlled clinical trials (eight double-blind, one single-blind,
seven with crossover design) assessed the efficacy of oral administration of
a standardized Semen Hippocastani extract (250–600 mg, equivalent to 100–
150 mg aescin daily) in a sustained-release form for the symptomatic treatment
of patients with chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) (13–21). In one study, 96
patients with CVI received the extract over two treatment periods of 20 days
each. Symptomatic improvement in skin colour, venous prominence, oedema,
dermatosis, and pain, itching and feeling of heaviness in the legs were observed
141

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
in the treated patients (13). However, the methodology of this study was poor,
and no statistical analysis was performed. Two later studies assessed the efficacy of the extract in 212 patients (19) and 95 patients (17) with CVI, using a
numerical scale to rate the severity of symptoms. A significant symptomatic
improvement (P < 0.01–0.05) in oedema, calf-muscle spasms, pain and feeling
of heaviness in the legs was observed in patients treated with the extract
(during two treatment periods of 20 days each) (17, 19). The efficacy of the
extract was assessed in a double-blind study of 20 female patients (13 with
pregnancy-related varicose veins and seven with CVI) during two treatment
periods of 14 days each. A significant reduction in leg volume (114 ml in patients
with varicose veins and 126 ml in patients with CVI, P < 0.01) was demonstrated by water plethysmography in patients treated with the extract (21).
Another double-blind study assessed the efficacy of the extract in the treatment
of 74 patients with CVI and lower-leg oedema. In patients treated with the
extract, the leg volume following induction of oedema was reduced from 32 ml
to 27 ml (determined by water plethysmography); in the placebo group the leg
volume increased from 27 ml to 31 ml (18).
Two further studies investigated the effects of the extract on the intravascular volume of the lower-extremity veins and on interstitial filtration (measured indirectly by venous-occlusion or water plethysmography) in patients
with CVI (14, 20). In one of the studies, after a single dose of 600 mg extract
(equivalent to 100 mg aescin), the transcapillary filtration coefficient decreased
by 22%, as compared with a slight increase in the coefficient of the placebo
group. This study demonstrated that the extract exerted its action primarily by
reducing capillary permeability (14). In the other study, patients treated daily
with 600 mg extract (equivalent to 100 mg aescin) for 28 days showed a significant reduction in extravascular volume of the foot and ankle (P < 0.01), as well
as a significant improvement in oedema, and feelings of tension, pain, fatigue
and itching of the legs (P < 0.05). However, no changes in venous capacity or
calf-muscle spasms were observed (20).
The efficacy of the extract was assessed in a randomized, parallel, doubleblind study of 40 patients with venous oedema due to chronic deep-vein incompetence stage II. Patients received 369–412 mg extract (equivalent to 75 mg
aescin) twice daily for 6 weeks. A significant reduction was observed in leg
volume (measured by water plethysmography after oedema induction) and leg
circumference in the treated group (P < 0.01) (15). A randomized, singleblind, parallel study compared the efficacy and safety of class II compression stockings with the extract or placebo in 240 patients with CVI. Patients in
the treatment group received 300 mg extract (equivalent to 50 mg aescin) twice
daily for 12 weeks. The lower-leg volume of the affected limbs decreased by
an average of 43.8 ml in patients treated with the extract and by 46.7 ml in
patients wearing compression stockings. In the placebo group, the lower-leg
volume increased by 9.8 ml. Thus, treatment with the extract or wearing
class II compression stockings resulted in similar decreases in lower-leg volume
(16).
142

Semen Hippocastani
A randomized, double-blind trial compared the efficacy of a standardized
extract (360–412 mg, equivalent to 75 mg aescin, twice daily) and oxerutins
(1000 mg O-(b-hydroxyethyl)-rutinosides twice daily) in 40 patients with CVI
and peripheral venous oedema. A reduction in oedema (based on measurement
of leg circumference) was observed in both treatment groups (39). Another randomized, double-blind study compared the efficacy of a standardized seed
extract with oxerutins in the treatment of 137 postmenopausal women with
chronic deep-vein incompetence stage II. Following a 1-week placebo run-in,
patients were treated daily with either 600 mg extract (equivalent to 100 mg
aescin) or 1000 mg oxerutins for 12 weeks, or 100 mg oxerutins for 4 weeks
followed by 500 mg oxerutins for 12 weeks. Patients were observed for 6 weeks
after treatment; the group treated with 1000 mg oxerutins had the greatest
decrease in leg volume (40).
A placebo-controlled, double-blind crossover study assessed the effect of a
standardized seed extract in the symptomatic treatment of 52 pregnant women
with venous insufficiency. Patients were treated with either one capsule containing 300 mg extract (equivalent to 50 mg aescin) or a placebo twice daily for
2 weeks. The extract was superior to the placebo in reducing oedema and
symptoms such as leg pain, fatigue and itching. Patients treated with the extract
also showed a greater resistance to oedema induction (41). The ability of a standardized seed extract to reduce oedema was investigated in a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 30 patients with CVI. A significant
reduction in leg circumference was found in the treatment group (P < 0.05) as
compared to the placebo group (P < 0.05) (42).
A double-blind placebo-controlled study investigated the effect of a standardized seed extract (one dose of 600 mg, equivalent to 100 mg aescin) on vascular capacity and filtration in the arms and legs of 12 healthy volunteers. Using
vein plethysmography, the study showed a decrease in both vascular capacity
and filtration coefficient in subjects treated with the extract (43). The effect of
a standardized seed extract (one dose of 1800 mg) on the flow velocity of
venous blood between the instep and the groin was quantitatively determined
in 30 patients with varicose veins by the xenon-133 appearance method. Blood
flow increased by >30%, with a lasting effect observed after 12 days of treatment. Blood viscosity was also reduced and there was a 73% improvement in
subjective complaints (44). A randomized double-blind study assessed the
effect of a standardized seed extract on lower-leg oedema in 10 healthy volunteers during a 15-hour airflight. A single dose of the extract (600 mg, equivalent to 100 mg aescin) completely prevented or significantly reduced the
increase in ankle and foot oedema (P < 0.05), determined by measuring the circumference of the ankle and heel before and after flying (45). A postmarketing surveillance study of over 5000 patients suffering from CVI demonstrated that treatment with a standardized seed extract (equivalent to 75 mg
aescin) twice daily for 4–10 weeks reduced the symptoms of leg pain, fatigue,
oedema and itching (46). In a multicentre study without controls, 71 patients
with CVI were treated daily with a topical gel containing 2% aescin. After
143

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
6 weeks of treatment, a significant reduction in ankle oedema (reduction of
0.7 cm in the ankle circumference, P < 0.001) and a significant reduction in the
symptom score (60%, P < 0.001) was reported (24). In a postmarketing surveillance study involving over 4000 patients with CVI, treatment with a standardized extract of the crude drug (equivalent to 50 mg aescin) twice daily
improved typical symptoms in more than 85% of patients (47).
A criteria-based systematic review assessed the randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials of standardized seed extracts for symptomatic treatment of CVI. The data were extracted from the trials in a standardized manner,
and the methodological quality and outcome of each trial were assessed by two
independent reviewers. In all trials, the extract was shown to be superior to the
placebo. Use of the extract was associated with a decrease in lower-leg oedema,
and a reduction in the circumference of the calf and ankle. Other symptoms such
as leg pain, itching and fatigue were reduced. Results from five comparative trials
demonstrated that the extract was as effective as oxerutins, and one of the five
trials showed that the extract was as effective as compression therapy (48).
Bruises
The efficacy of a topically applied gel containing 2% aescin in reducing the tenderness to pressure haematoma (experimentally induced by injection) was
tested in a randomized, placebo-controlled, single-dose study involving 70
healthy volunteers. Based on tonometric sensitivity measurements, the aescin
gel significantly reduced the tenderness to pressure haematoma (P < 0.001). This
effect was seen 1 hour after treatment and lasted for 9 hours (49).
Other trials have assessed the efficacy and safety of a topically applied gel
containing 2% aescin for the treatment of bruises and sprains (22, 23).

Contraindications
Semen Hippocastani is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of
the Hippocastanaceae family.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Drug interactions
Two suspected cases of toxic nephropathy probably due to very high doses of
aescin were reported (50). Therefore, Semen Hippocastani should not be
administered with other drugs known to be nephrotoxic, such as gentamicin.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A 30% ethanol extract of Semen Hippocastani was not mutagenic in the
Salmonella/microsome assay using S. typhimurium strains TA98 and TA100
144

Semen Hippocastani
(200 ml/ml) (51). Sodium aescinate had no effect on the fertility of male rats
(52).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
A 40% ethanol extract of Semen Hippocastani was not teratogenic or embryotoxic in rats or rabbits following intragastric administration of 1.6 ml/kg body
weight (53). Intragastric administration of a 40% ethanol extract of the seeds
to rats (100–300 mg/kg body weight) or rabbits (100 mg/kg body weight) was
not teratogenic. However, when pregnant rabbits were given 300 mg/kg body
weight, a reduction in birth weight was observed (54).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Semen Hippocastani has been used in clinical trials involving pregnant women
with no ill effects (21, 41). However, the drug should not be administered
during pregnancy without medical supervision.

Paediatric use
There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Semen Hippocastani in children.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
and laboratory test interactions; or nursing mothers. Therefore, Semen
Hippocastani should not be administered during lactation without medical
supervision.

Adverse reactions
Case reports have indicated gastrointestinal side-effects such as nausea
and stomach discomfort (47, 55). Allergic reactions have also been reported
(56).

Dosage forms
Crude drug and extracts (7). Store away from light and humidity (1).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 250.0–312.5 mg twice daily of a standardized powdered extract
of the crude drug (equivalent to 100 mg aescin) containing 16–20% triterpene
glycosides, calculated as aescin (55); topical gels containing 2% aescin (22–24,
49).
145

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

References
1. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
2. Deutsches Arzneibuch. Stuttgart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 1998.
3. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
4. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
5. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
7. Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Aesculus hippocastanum L. Fitoterapia, 1996, 67:483–510.
8. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
9. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
10. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
11. Kockar OM et al. Quantitative determination of escin. A comparative study of HPLC
and TLC-densitometry. Fitoterapia, 1994, 65:439–443.
12. Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R. Quantitative determination of biologically active
constituents in medicinal plant crude extracts by thin-layer chromatography–
densitometry. Journal of Chromatography, 1983, 281:263–271.
13. Alter H. Zur medikamentösen Therapie der Varikosis. Zeitschrift für Allgemeine
Medizin, 1973, 49:1301–1304.
14. Bisler H et al. Wirkung von Rosskastaniensamenextrakt auf die transkapilläre Filtration bei chronischer venöser Insuffizienz. Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift,
1986, 111:1321–1328.
15. Diehm C et al. Medical edema protection—clinical benefit in patients with chronic
deep vein incompetence. A placebo-controlled double-blind study. Vasa, 1992, 21:
188–192.
16. Diehm C et al. Comparison of leg compression stocking and oral horse-chestnut
seed extract therapy in patients with chronic venous insufficiency. Lancet, 1996, 347:
292–294.
17. Friederich HC et al. Ein Beitrag zur Bewertung von intern wirksamen Venenpharmaka. Zeitschrift für Hautkrankheiten, 1978, 53:369–374.
18. Lohr E et al. Ödemprotektive Therapie bei chronischer Veneninsuffizienz mit
Ödemneigung. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1986, 128:579–581.
19. Neiss A, Böhm C. Zum Wirksamkeitsnachweis von Rosskastaniensamenextrakt
beim varikösen Symptomenkomplex. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1976:
213–216.
20. Rudofsky G et al. Ödemprotektive Wirkung und klinische Wirksamkeit von Rosskastaniensamenextrakt im Doppelblindversuch. Phlebologie und Proktologie, 1986, 15:
47–54.
21. Steiner M, Hillemanns HG. Untersuchung zur ödemprotektiven Wirkung eines
Venentherapeutikums. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1986, 31:551–552.
22. Götz AK, Giannetti BM. Naturstoffe in der Therapie stumpfer
Sportverletzungen—heute noch zeitgemäss? Erfahrungsheilkunde, 1990, 6:362–
371.
23. Calabrese C, Preston P. Äscin bei der Behandlung von Hämatomen—eine randomisierte doppelblind-Studie. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1994, 60:112.
24. Geissbühler S, Degenring FH. Behandlung von chronisch venöser Insuffizienz mit
Aesculaforce Venengel. Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Ganzheits Medizin, 1999, 11:
82–87.

146

Semen Hippocastani
25. Materia medica of Chinese herbology. Shanghai, State Administration of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai Scientific and Technical Press, 1996.
26. Arnold M, Przerwa M. Die therapeutische Beeinflussbarkeit experimentell erzeugter
Ödeme. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1976, 26:402–409.
27. Leslie GB. A pharmacometric evaluation of nine Bio-Strath herbal remedies. Medita,
1978, 8:3–19.
28. Cebo B et al. Pharmacological properties of saponin fractions obtained from domestic crude drugs: Saponaria officinalis, Primula officinalis and Aesculus hippocastanum.
Herba Polonica, 1976, 22:154–162.
29. Guillaume M, Padioleau F. Veinotonic effect, vascular protection, anti-inflammatory
and free-radical scavenging properties of horse chestnut extract. ArzneimittelForschung, 1994, 44:25–35.
30. Aizawa Y et al. Anti-inflammatory action of aescin. Intravenous injection. Oyo
Yakuri, 1974, 8:211–213.
31. Damas P et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of escin. Bulletin de la Société royale des Sciences de Liège, 1976, 45:436–440.
32. Tarayre JP et al. Pharmacological study of some capillary-acting substances. Annales
de Pharmacie française, 1975, 33:467–469.
33. Girerd RJ et al. Archives for International Pharmacodynamics, 1961, 133:127–130.
34. Preziosi P, Manca P. The anti-edematous and anti-inflammatory effects of aescin and
its relation to the hypophyseal–adrenal system. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1965, 15:404–
413.
35. Longiave D et al. The mode of action of aescin on isolated veins: relationship with
PGF2a. Pharmacological Research Communications, 1978, 10:145–152.
36. Felix W et al. Vasoaktive Wirkungen von alpha-Aescin. Ergebnisse der Angiologie, 1984,
30:93–105.
37. Facino RM et al. Anti-elastase and anti-hyaluronidase activities of saponins and
sapogenins from Hedera helix, Aesculus hippocastanum, and Ruscus aculeatus: factors
contributing to their efficacy in the treatment of venous insufficiency. Archiv der Pharmazie (Weinheim), 1995, 328:720–724.
38. Masaki H et al. Active-oxygen scavenging activity of plant extracts. Biological and
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1995, 18:162–166.
39. Erler M. Rosskastaniensamenextrakt bei der Therapie peripherer venöser Ödeme.
Die Medizinische Welt, 1991, 42:593–596.
40. Rehn D et al. Comparative clinical efficacy and tolerability of oxerutins and horse
chestnut extract in patients with chronic venous insufficiency. Arzneimittel-Forschung,
1996, 46:483–487.
41. Steiner M, Hillemanns HG. Venostatin retard in the management of venous problems during pregnancy. Phlebology, 1990, 5:41–44.
42. Pilz E. Ödeme bei Venenerkrankungen. Die Medizinische Welt, 1990, 41:1143–1144.
43. Pauschinger P. Neuere Untersuchungen zur Wirkung von Venostasin retard auf die
kapilläre Funktion. Ergebnisse der Angiologie, 1984, 30:129–137.
44. Klemm J. Strömungsgeschwindigkeit von Blut in varikösen Venen der unteren
Extremitäten. Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1982, 124:579–582.
45. Marshall M, Dormandy JA. Oedema of long-distance flights. Phlebology, 1987, 2:
123–124.
46. Greeske K, Pohlmann BK. Rosskastaniensamenextrakt—ein wirksames Therapieprinzip in der Praxis. Fortschritte der Medizin, 1996, 114:196–200.
47. Masuhr T et al. Nutzen-Risiko-Bewertung von Venoplant® retard, einem auf Aescin
standardisierten Präparat aus Rosskastaniensamenextrakt, bei Patienten mit chronischer Veneninsuffizienz. Top Medizin, 1994, 8:21–24.
48. Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse-chestnut seed extract for chronic venous insufficiency.
A criteria-based systematic review. Archives of Dermatology, 1998, 134:1356–
1360.

147

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
49. Calabrese C, Preston P. Report on the results of a double-blind, randomized, singledose trial of a topical 2% aescin gel versus placebo in the acute treatment of experimentally induced hematoma in volunteers. Planta Medica, 1993, 59:394–397.
50. Grasso A, Corvaglia E. Due casi di sospetta tubulonefrosi tossica da escina. Gazzetta
Medica Italiana, 1976, 135:581–584.
51. Schimmer O et al. An evaluation of 55 commercial plant extracts in the Ames mutagenicity test. Pharmazie, 1994, 49:448–451.
52. Kreybig H, Prechtel K. Toxizitäts- und Fertilitätsstudien mit Aescin bei der Ratte.
Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1977, 7:1465–1466.
53. Leslie GB, Salmon G. Repeated dose toxicity studies and reproductive studies on
nine Bio-Strath herbal remedies. Swiss Medicine, 1979, 1:1–3.
54. Liehn HD et al. A toxicological study of extractum Hippocastani seed (EHS). Panminerva Medicine, 1972, 14:84–91.
55. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
56. Escribano MM et al. Contact urticaria due to aescin. Contact Dermatitis, 1997,
37:233–253.

148

Herba Hyperici

Definition
Herba Hyperici consists of the dried flowering tops or aerial parts of Hypericum
perforatum L. (Clusiaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Hypericum officinarum Crantz, Hypericum officinale Gater ex. Steud., Hypericum
vulgare Lam. (4). Clusiaceae is also referred to as Guttiferae or Hypericaceae.

Selected vernacular names
Balsana, bassan, bossant, common St John’s Wort, corazoncillo, dendlu, devil’s
scourge, echtes Johanniskraut, Eisenblut, erba di San Giovanni, flor de sao joao,
fuga daemonum, hardhay, Hartheu, herbe à mille trous, herbe de millepertuis,
Herrgottsblut, Hexenkraut, hierba de San Juan, hiperico, hipericon, houfarighoun, iperico, Jageteufel, Johannisblut, Johanniskraut, John’s wort, Jottannesort, klamath weed, Konradskraut, Liebeskraut, Lord God’s wonder plant,
Mannskraft, millepertuis, pelicao, perforata, perforate St John’s wort, pinillo de
oro, quian-ceng lou, St Jan’s kraut, St John’s Wort, seiyouotogiri, sint janskruid,
tenturotou, Teufelsflucht, Tüpfelhartheu, witches’s herb, zwieroboij (2, 4–7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to northern Africa, South Africa, South America, Asia, Australia,
Europe and New Zealand, and is naturalized in the United States of America
(2, 7, 8). The plant material is harvested at flowering time (1).

Description
A herbaceous, aromatic perennial plant, up to 1 m high; glabrous throughout,
green or sometimes glaucous. Stems rounded, 2-winged, erect and branched at
top. Leaves oval, linear-oblong, broadly elliptic, subcordate, flat or more
or less revolute-marginated with pellucid glands and sometimes a number of
brown-black glandular dots. Flowers numerous, forming a broadly paniculate,
compound cymose inflorescence. Petals oblong to oblong-elliptic, inequilateral
with numerous glandular dots. Seed 1 mm long, cylindrical, brown, minutely
pitted longitudinally (2, 8, 9).
149

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Plant material of interest: dried flowering tops or aerial
parts
General appearance
Stem glabrous greenish-yellow to brownish-yellow branching, 2-winged,
cylindrical with 2 equidistant longitudinal bands. Leaves glabrous, generally
sessile, opposite, greenish-grey, oval, 8–35 mm long, with entire margins;
laminal margin often more or less revolute-marginated. Brown-black glandular
dots sometimes present along the edges; numerous pellucid glands on the entire
surface. Flowers, 2 cm in diameter, regular, forming a broadly paniculate, compound cymose inflorescence at top of stem, composed of: 5 green, lanceolate
sepals, containing punctiform, black glandular dots on the edges; 5 goldenyellow petals, with numerous glandular dots along margins; and 3 staminal
blades, each divided into multiple golden-yellow stamens. Anthers with single,
terminal, dark pigment dot. Ovary elongated and conical, parietal placentation,
carries 3 styles. Fruits trilocular capsules containing numerous brown, triangular seeds (1–3, 9).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: weak, aromatic, balsamic; taste: bitter, acrid (9–11).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section of the stem circular and presents 2 lateral edges corresponding to the 2 longitudinal bands. From the exterior inwards are seen: epidermal layer formed of large polygonal cells; continuous collenchymal layer,
slightly more developed at the 2 lateral edges; a cortical parenchyma containing crystals of calcium oxalate in the shape of a sea urchin; a ring of continuous phloem, distinct from the xylem, which consists of large vessels and
a lignified parenchyma with a visible cambium; and a lacunose medullary
parenchyma. Secretory pockets, almost invisible, rarely present in the endoderm. Upper surface of leaf section shows polygonal cells with sinuous, slightly
beaded, anticlinal walls; cells of lower surface smaller, anticlinal walls
more wavy with frequent paracytic, sometimes anomocytic, stomata; smooth
cuticle, thicker on upper surface; straight-walled, elongated epidermal cells
of veins occasionally beaded. Dorsoventral surface of leaf consists of a single
palisade layer and large oil glands. Midrib shows single, collateral bundle with
small area of lignified xylem. Microscopic characteristics of the sepal resemble
those of the leaf. Petal narrow, elongated, thin-walled, epidermal cells
with straight anticlinal walls on outer surface and wavy on inner surface.
Stamen lignified fibrous layer of anther wall; elongated, thin-walled cells of
filament with striated cuticle. Pollen grains spherical or elliptical, 20–28 mm in
diameter, with 3 germinal pores and smooth exine. Ovary small polygonal cells
150

Herba Hyperici
with underlying oil glands. Seed testa brown, thick-walled hexagonal cells (2,
3, 9).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-green or brownish-green. Leaf fragments abundant, most containing
large characteristic hypericin oil glands with brown to red contents. Fragments
of leaf epidermis, the adaxial side with thick-walled punctate, slightly sinuate
cells, and abaxial side with sinuate cells and paracytic stomata; mesophyll fragments with large secretory pockets which are spherical, bright, containing
strongly refractive oil droplets; fragments of palisade parenchyma; stem fragments with reticulate spiral vessels, areolate punctation, long fibres with thick
walls, ligneous parenchyma, and small number of thick-walled, characteristically punctate medullary cells; fragments of petals made of elongated rectangular cells with irregular nodulous thickenings, containing numerous yellow
droplets and large, round to oval secretory pockets; fragments of anthers; pollen
grains 20–28 mm in diameter, smooth spherical or elliptical with 3 germinal
pores; clusters of calcium oxalate crystals (1, 2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations and thin-layer chromatography for
the presence of characteristic compounds (hypericin, pseudohypericin, chlorogenic acid, hyperoside) (1, 9–11). Additionally, a liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry method is available (12). The presence of hyperforin and rutin in
Herba Hyperici is used to differentiate Hypericum perforatum from other Hypericum species (2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (13).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 3% stems with a diameter greater than 5 mm (1) and not more
than 2% other foreign matter (1, 3).

Total ash
Not more than 7% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2.5% (9).
151

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Sulfated ash
Not more than 2.5% (9).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 12% (9).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (1, 3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (14). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (14), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13) and
pesticide residues (15).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (13) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in accordance
with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.08% hypericins calculated as hypericin, as determined
by spectrophotometry (1). Quantitation can also be obtained by highperformance liquid chromatography (2, 16).

Major chemical constituents
The major characteristic constituents include 0.05–0.30% naphthodianthrones
(hypericin, pseudohypericin, hyperforin, adhyperforin); 2–4% flavonoids
(hyperoside, quercitrin, isoquercitrin, rutin); and 7–15% catechin tannins (2, 4,
7, 17). The structures of the representative constituents are presented below.

152

Herba Hyperici
OH

O

H3C

OH

H3C

O

CH3

OH
H 3C

OH

R

CH3

O

H
H3C
O

OH

OH

O

H3C

hypericin
R=H
pseudohypericin R = OH

CH3
CH3

and epimer at C*

H OH
CH3
*
R

R=H
hyperforin
adhyperforin R = CH3

CH3

OH
OH
HO

R = Rhap
quercitrin
hyperoside R = Galp
isoquercitrin R = Glcf
R =Rhap-(1Æ6)-Glcp
rutin

O
O
OH

O

R
OH

HO
O

HO
Galp =

HO
H

OH

Glcf =
OH

Rhap
Rhap ==
OH

b-D-galactopyranosyl

b-D-glucofuranosyl
HO

O
O
CH
CH33

HO
HO OH
OH

6-deoxy-a-L-mannopyranosyl

O O
CH3

Rhap-(1Æ6)-Glcp =

HO
HO

O
OH

HO HO

O
OH
HO
OH

O -6-deoxy-a-L-mannopyranosyl-(1Æ6)-b-D-glucopyranosyl

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Symptomatic treatment of mild and moderate depressive episodes (classified
as F32.0 and F32.1, respectively, in the International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, Tenth revision (ICD-10) (18)) (19–31).

Uses reported in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Externally for the treatment of minor cuts, burns and skin ulcers (8, 32). Topically for viral infections (33).

153

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
As an antiphlogistic agent in the treatment of inflammation of the bronchi
and urogenital tract; treatment of biliary disorders, bladder irritation, the
common cold, diabetes mellitus, dyspepsia, haemorrhoids, neuralgia, migraine
headaches, sciatica and ulcers (5, 8). Also used as a diuretic, an emmenagogue
and an antimalarial agent (5, 8).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antidepressant activity
Behavioural studies, performed primarily in rodents, have demonstrated the
antidepressant activity of Herba Hyperici by measuring the exploratory and
locomotor activities of animals in an unknown environment (34, 35). Intragastric administration of a 95% ethanol extract of the herb to male gerbils (2 mg/kg
body weight) suppressed clonidine-induced depression. Intragastric administration of the extract to male mice (5 mg/kg body weight) enhanced exploratory
activity in a foreign environment and significantly prolonged narcotic-induced
sleeping time in a dose-dependent manner; the treated mice also exhibited
reserpine antagonism. Similar to standard antidepressant drugs, the extract
(6 mg/kg body weight) increased the activity of mice in the waterwheel test
following a single dose; prolonged administration (6 mg/kg body weight, daily
for 3 weeks) decreased aggressiveness in socially isolated male mice (35).
Intraperitoneal administration of a 50% ethanol extract of the herb to mice
(250 mg/kg body weight) reduced the tail flick response to radiant heat, and
significantly decreased swimming time in the forced swimming test (P < 0.05)
and walking time on a rotating rod (P < 0.005), as well as exploratory activity
(P < 0.05) (36). Significant, dose-dependent, antidepressant activities were
observed in the behavioural despair test and the learned helplessness paradigm
in rats treated intragastrically with a carbon dioxide extract of the crude drug
containing 38.8% hyperforin (30 mg/kg body weight) or an ethanol extract containing 4.5% hyperforin (300 mg/kg body weight) (P < 0.001). The results were
comparable to those obtained following intraperitoneal administration of
imipramine (10 mg/kg body weight) (37). Intragastric administration of an
ethanol extract containing 4.5% hyperforin (50, 150 and 300 mg/kg body
weight, daily for 3 days) or a carbon dioxide extract devoid of hypericin but
containing 38.8% hyperforin (5, 15 and 30 mg/kg body weight, daily for 3 days)
had similar antidepressant activity in rodents (rats and mice) (38, 39). In the
same dosage range, the ethanol extract potentiated dopaminergic behavioural
responses, whereas these effects were either absent or less pronounced in
rodents treated with the carbon dioxide extract. In contrast, serotoninergic
effects of the carbon dioxide extract were more pronounced than those of the
ethanol extract (38). Intragastric administration of a methanol extract contain154

Herba Hyperici
ing both hypericin and pseudohypericin (500 mg/kg body weight) to mice produced a dose-dependent increase in ketamine-induced sleeping time and also
increased body temperature. The extract also decreased immobility time in the
tail suspension test and forced swimming tests, which are both regarded as
indicative of antidepressant activity (40). Intragastric administration of a 50%
ethanol extract of the herb prolonged pentobarbital-induced sleeping time
(13.25 mg/kg body weight) and depressed the central nervous system in male
mice (25.50 mg/kg body weight). The observed effects were similar to those
seen in mice treated with diazepam (2 mg/kg body weight) (41). Measurement
of some metabolites of biological amines in the urine of various animal models
has established a correlation between the excretion in the urine of 3-methoxy4-hydroxyphenylglycol, the main metabolite of noradrenaline, with the start of
the therapeutic antidepressant activity (42).
A hydroalcoholic extract of the herb inhibited serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) receptor expression in mouse brain synaptosome preparations in vitro (50 mmol/l), and similar effects were observed during ex vivo
experiments (43). In other studies, hydroalcoholic extracts of the herb inhibited serotonin reuptake (IC50 6.2–25.0 mg/ml) (44, 45), and inhibited both gaminobutyric acid (GABA) reuptake (IC50 1 mg/ml) and GABA type A receptor
binding (IC50 3 mg/ml) in vitro (46).
A hydroalcoholic extract of the fresh flowers and buds of H. perforatum (containing 0.1% hypericin) was subjected to a series of assays involving 39 receptor types and two enzymes. Receptor assays exhibiting at least 50% radioligand
displacement or 50% inhibition of monamine oxidase (MAO) were considered
to be active. The extract demonstrated specific affinity for the GABA (types A
and B), serotonin, benzodiazepine and inositol triphosphate receptors, nonspecific affinity for adenosine receptors and inhibited MAO types A and B. Purified hypericin lacked any significant MAO (type A or B)-inhibitory activity at
concentrations up to 10 mmol/l, and had affinity only for N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors in rat forebrain membranes (47).
An ethanol extract of the herb inhibited radioligand binding to the NMDA,
GABA type A and GABA type B receptors (IC50 7.025, 3.240 and 3.310 mg/ml,
respectively). The extract also inhibited synaptosomal GABA and L-glutamate
uptake in vitro (IC50 1.11 and 21.25 mg/ml, respectively) (48).
A methanol or carbon dioxide extract of the herb, and pure hyperforin
significantly inhibited synaptosomal uptake of serotonin, noradrenaline,
dopamine, L-glutamate and GABA in vitro (49). The carbon dioxide extract (containing 38.8% hyperforin) was more active than the methanol extract (containing 4.5% hyperforin), due to the higher hyperforin concentration. Inhibition
was most pronounced with purified hyperforin, showing the following order of
affinity: noradrenaline ≥ dopamine > GABA ≥ serotonin >> glutamate (IC50
0.043–0.445 mg/ml) (49, 50). Neither hyperforin nor the carbon dioxide extract
inhibited the activity of MAO type A or B at concentrations up to 50 mg/ml (49).
A methanol extract of dried H. perforatum flowers inhibited radiolabelledflumazenil binding to the benzodiazepine sites of the GABA receptor in rat brain
155

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
preparations in vitro (IC50 6.83 mg/ml) (51). The number of serotonergic 5-HT1 A
and 5-HT2 A receptors significantly increased in the brains of rats treated with
an ethanol extract of the herb (2.7 g/kg body weight) daily for 26 weeks, whereas
the affinity of both serotonergic receptors remained unaltered. These data
suggest that prolonged administration of the extract induced upregulation of the
5-HT1 A and 5-HT2 A receptors (52). The affinity of hypericin for 30 types of
receptor and reuptake sites was determined in vitro. At 1 mmol/l, hypericin
inhibited less than 40% specific radioligand binding at all sites tested, except
binding at the acetylcholine and sigma receptors (53).
The mechanism of the antidepressant effect of Herba Hyperici is not well
understood. Early studies focused on the inhibition of MAO and catechol-Omethyltransferase (COMT), the two enzymes responsible for the catabolism
of biological amines, such as serotonin. Initial investigations analysed the
in vitro inhibition of MAO using a series of xanthones isolated from extracts
of the herb (54, 55). In later studies, hypericin was reported to inhibit
MAO type A (IC50 6.8 ¥ 10-5 mol/l) and type B (IC50 4.2 ¥ 10-5 mol/l) in rat brain
mitochondria in vitro (56). However, analysis of the hypericin fraction used
in these experiments revealed that at least 20% of the extract was composed
of other constituents, including some flavonoid derivatives (8). Xanthonecontaining fractions, free of hypericin and tannins, of a hydroalcoholic extract
of H. perforatum showed significant inhibition in vitro of MAO type A (which
is specific for serotonin) (57). In other investigations, only the flavone aglycone,
quercitrin, and the xanthone derivative, norethyriol, showed significant inhibition of MAO type A (57–59). Hypericin was excluded as the active constituent,
and the flavonols and 1,3,6,7-tetrahydroxyxanthone were reported to be the
active constituents of a crude extract of the herb (57–59). Molecular modelling
studies of the constituents of the herb also indicated that the flavonoids may
be the most likely candidates for inhibitors of MAO, as their structures are
similar to those of known MAO type A inhibitors, toloxotone and brofaromine
(60).
The MAO-inhibiting activity of six fractions of a hydroalcoholic extract of
the herb was determined in vitro and ex vivo. In vitro inhibition of MAO type
A in rat brain homogenates could only be shown at a concentration of 1–
10 mmol/l of a crude extract or a flavonoid-rich fraction. In ex vivo studies using
albino rats, neither the crude extract nor the xanthone-containing fractions
inhibited MAO type A or MAO type B after intraperitoneal administration of
300 mg/kg body weight of the extract or 1–10 nmol/l of the fractions. In addition, purified hypericin did not inhibit MAO type A either in vitro or ex vivo
(61).
The in vitro effects of hypericin, an ethanol extract, and fractions of
the extract were tested for inhibition of MAO and COMT obtained from pig
liver. Inhibition of MAO was seen with hypericin (1 mmol/l),1 ethanol extract
(0.1 mmol/l),1 and a fraction containing hypericins and flavonols (0.01 mmol/l).1
1

Molar concentrations were based on a mean molar mass of 500 (62).

156

Herba Hyperici
Weak inhibition of COMT was observed with hypericin and the ethanol extract
(both at a concentration of 1 mmol/l),1 whereas two fractions, containing
flavonols and xanthones, inhibited COMT to a greater extent at 0.1 mmol/l1
(62). However, the inhibitory concentrations observed during this study appear
to be too high to be of any clinical significance.
Other possible mechanisms of the antidepressant effect of Herba Hyperici
include its ability to modulate the production of mediators of inflammation
such as cytokines, particularly interleukins. Strong suppression of interleukin6 (IL-6) release was observed in blood samples from depressed patients treated
with H. perforatum extract (63). IL-6 is involved in the modulation of the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis within the nervous/immune
system. Elevated IL-6 levels activate the HPA axis, thus increasing levels of
adrenal hormones that play a role in depression.
Effect on smooth muscle contraction
A 95% ethanol extract or tincture of the herb (200 mg/ml) inhibited bariumand histamine-induced smooth muscle contractions of guinea-pig ileum in vitro
(64), and contractions of cat and mouse intestine (65). An ethyl acetate extract
of the herb (0.1 mg/ml) inhibited potassium chloride- and histamine-induced
contractions in pig coronary artery in vitro (66).
Antibacterial and antiviral activity
A methanol extract of Herba Hyperici inhibited the growth in vitro of
Escherichia coli, Proteus vulgaris, Streptococcus mutans, Streptococcus sanguis, Staphylococcus oxford and Staphylococcus aureus (MIC 0.31–1.25 mg/ml) (67). An acetone,
hot aqueous or ethyl acetate extract of the herb was active against influenza
virus A2 (Mannheim 57), herpes simplex virus 2, poliovirus II and vaccinia virus
in vitro (68, 69). However, a decoction or hydroalcoholic extract of H. perforatum dried stem was not active against herpes simplex virus 1 or 2, or HIV in
vitro (100 mg/ml) (70). In vitro activity of hypericin has been demonstrated
against Friend murine leukaemia virus, hepatitis B virus, murine cytomegalovirus, human cytomegalovirus (Davis strain), parainfluenza 3 virus, Sindbis
virus, vaccinia virus, vesicular stomatitis virus and equine infectious anaemia
virus (71–77). Hypericin and pseudohypericin also inhibited herpes simplex
virus types 1 and 2, and HIV-1 in vitro (75, 77–83). Hypericin inhibited the
activity of HIV reverse transcriptase in vitro (IC50 0.77 mmol/l) (74, 80, 84), and
inhibited herpes simplex virus, Rauscher murine leukaemia and Friend murine
leukaemia viruses in mice after intravenous, intraperitoneal or intragastric
administration (80–82). Intraperitoneal administration of a 5% aqueous extract
of the herb to mice resulted in viricidal activity against tick-borne encephalitis
virus (85). Hypericin displayed marginal activity in vitro against Molony murine
leukaemia virus and did not show selective activity against herpes simplex
1

Molar concentrations were based on a mean molar mass of 500 (62).

157

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
virus, influenza virus A, adenovirus or poliovirus (82). However, incubation of
the virus with hypericin prior to infection resulted in viricidal activity against
all enveloped viruses tested (IC50 1.56–25 mg/ml), but not against non-enveloped
viruses (82). The antiviral activity of hypericin appears to involve a photoactivation process that forms a singlet oxygen and inactivates both viral fusion and
syncytia formation (72, 75, 86).
Protein kinase C inhibition
Numerous in vitro studies have demonstrated that hypericin is a potent
inhibitor of protein kinase C (87–92). Hypericin treatment of glioma cell lines
inhibited growth and also induced cell death due to protein kinase C (93).
Receptor tyrosine kinase activity of epidermal growth factor is also inhibited
by hypericin and may be linked to its antiviral and antineoplastic effects
(89, 94). The inhibition of protein kinase C may contribute to the antiinflammatory effects of Herba Hyperici, as hypericin also inhibited the release
of arachidonic acid and leukotriene B4 (94).
Wound healing
External application of a 20% aqueous extract of the crude drug to the skin of
guinea-pigs and rabbits accelerated healing of experimentally induced wounds
(95, 96). Intragastric administration of a 60% ethanol extract of the dried leaves
to rats (0.1 ml/animal) accelerated healing of experimentally induced wounds by
enhancing the strength and rate of wound contraction and epithelialization (97).

Clinical pharmacology
Antidepressant activity
Clinical trials without controls
The safety and efficacy of oral administration of Herba Hyperici has been
assessed in more than 5000 patients in numerous case reports and studies (22,
23, 31, 98). In a drug-monitoring study involving 3250 patients, 49% were
assessed as being mildly depressed, 46% as moderately depressed and 3% as
severely depressed at the beginning of the trial. The patients were treated with
300 mg of a dried 80% methanol extract of the herb three times daily, and evaluated after 2 and 4 weeks of therapy. After treatment, 80% of patients had
improved or were symptom-free, while 13–16% remained unchanged or were
worse. Minor adverse reactions were reported in 2.4% of patients (31). A postmarketing trial was performed with 2404 patients with symptoms of mild to
moderate depression who were treated with 2–4 capsules of an ethanol extract
of the herb (equivalent to 0.6–1.8 mg total hypericin) daily for 4–6 weeks.
Symptomatic improvement was evaluated as good to very good in 77% of
patients and satisfactory in 15% (99).
The effects of an ethanol extract of the herb on the electroencephalogram
(EEG) of 40 patients with depression were determined following administra158

Herba Hyperici
tion of the extract (equivalent to 0.5 mg total hypericin or 1.4 g crude drug) daily
for 4 weeks. An increase in theta-activity, a decrease in alpha-activity and no
change in beta-activity were observed, indicating the induction of relaxation
(100). A significant increase in nocturnal melatonin plasma concentration was
observed in 13 healthy subjects treated with a hydroethanolic extract of the
herb (equivalent to 0.53 mg total hypericin) daily for 3 weeks (101). A significant increase in the concentration of neurotransmitters in the urine was
observed 2 hours after administration of a standardized ethanol extract of the
crude drug to six women with symptoms of depression (42).
Reviews of clinical trials
The results from over 28 controlled clinical trials involving oral administration
of Herba Hyperici have been published. Twelve of the trials, involving 950
patients, were conducted using an ethanol extract of the herb, while the other
16 trials of 1170 patients used a dried 80% methanol extract (26). A systematic
review and meta-analysis of 23 of the randomized clinical trials involving
1757 patients assessed the efficacy of the herb in the symptomatic treatment
of mild to moderate depression. Twenty trials were double-blind, one was
single-blind and two were open studies. Fifteen of the trials involving 1008
patients were placebo-controlled and eight studies of 749 patients were comparison trials with other antidepressant drugs. With the exception of two trials,
all studies had treatment periods of 4–8 weeks. The daily dosage ranged from
0.4 to 2.7 mg hypericin in 300–1000 mg of a standardized extract of the herb.
Seventeen trials used the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (Hamilton
Depression Rating Scale), which focuses primarily on somatic symptoms, to
measure effectiveness, while 12 trials used the Clinical Global Impression Scale.
The latter involves observer-rated analysis of severity of illness, global improvement and efficacy. The meta-analysis concluded that the herb was significantly
superior to the placebo and was as effective as standard antidepressants such
as maprotiline or imipramine (75 mg three times daily). Fewer side-effects were
seen in the herb-treated patients (19.8%) than in those receiving standard antidepressants (52.8%) (21).
A systematic, criteria-based review of 18 controlled clinical trials using either
ethanol or methanol extracts of the herb as a treatment for depression was
carried out. Twelve of the trials (nine placebo-controlled and three comparison
trials) met the methodological inclusion criteria and were included in the
review. The results of the cumulative data show that extracts of the herb were
superior to the placebo for the symptomatic treatment of depression as measured by the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. Results of the comparison
studies with maprotiline (75 mg daily) and imipramine (50–75 mg daily) and
other standard antidepressants suggest that extracts of the herb have a similar
therapeutic profile. Some flaws in the reported studies included no intention to
treat analysis, lack of control over compliance, and insufficient description of
the extract or placebo used (19).
159

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
A review of 12 double-blind, placebo-controlled and three comparison clinical trials assessed the efficacy of the herb for the treatment of mild to moderate depression, and the methodology used to perform the studies. The review
concluded that the antidepressant activity of a standardized extract of the herb
(300 mg standardized to contain 0.9 mg hypericin three times daily for 4–8
weeks) was sufficiently documented. However, it also concluded that no dosefinding studies had been conducted, and that studies on inpatients with severe
depression and endogenously depressed patients were lacking. In the three
comparison studies, the daily dose of 75 mg maprotiline or 30 mg amitriptyline
was viewed as too low. The review concluded that further trials of longer duration in comparison with higher doses of standard antidepressants are warranted
(27).
A double-blind, randomized, multicentre study was performed to evaluate
the efficacy, safety and tolerability of a daily dose of 900 mg hydroalcoholic
extract of the herb or 75 mg amitriptyline. After a 1-week placebo run-in phase,
156 patients were treated with 300 mg extract or 25 mg amitriptyline, three
times daily for 6 weeks. The patients were assessed before and after treatment.
The Hamilton Depression Rating Scale changed from 20 to 10 in the extracttreated patients and from 21 to 6 in the amitriptyline-treated patients (P < 0.05).
The Montgomery-Asberg Rating Scale for Depression changed from 27 to 13
in the extract-treated patients, and from 26 to 6.5 in the amitriptyline-treated
patients (P < 0.05). Similar scores in the Clinical Global Impression Scale were
observed in both groups (29). In a randomized, double-blind, multicentre trial
the effectiveness of a standardized dried 80% methanol extract of the herb
(containing 0.3% hypericin) was compared with that of imipramine in 209
patients with recurrent depressive disorder, current episode severe without psychotic symptoms (18). Patients were treated daily with 1800 mg extract or
150 mg imipramine for 6 weeks. Assessment of patients before and after
treatment revealed the following changes. In the Hamilton Depression Rating
Scale: from 25.3 to 14.4 in the extract-treated patients, and from 26.1 to 13.4
in the imipramine-treated patients (P < 0.021). In the von Zerssen Depression
Scale: from 28.9 to 13.6 in the extract-treated patients, and from 26 to 6.5 in
the imipramine-treated patients (P < 0.05). Results in the Clinical Global
Impression Scale showed a trend in favour of imipramine. Although the efficacy of the extract was not significantly different from that of imipramine,
analysis of the patient subgroups showed that it was most effective in patients
with moderately severe depression (28).
A prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study assessed the safety and efficacy of a standardized ethanol extract of the
herb for the treatment of 151 patients with mild and moderate depressive
episodes (classified as F32.0 and F32.1, respectively, in 1CD-10 (18)). Patients
received either one 250 mg tablet of the extract (equivalent to 1 mg hypericin)
or a placebo twice daily for 6 weeks. The primary efficacy variable was the
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, and secondary variables were the
risk–benefit Clinical Global Impression Scales I–III and Visual Analogue Scale
160

Herba Hyperici
(a validated, patient self-assessment test). Decreases were seen in the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale in 56% of patients treated with the extract,
whereas decreases were seen in only 15% of patients who received the placebo
(24). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre study
assessed the clinical efficacy and safety of two extracts of the herb differing in
their hyperforin content (0.5% or 5.0% hyperforin) in 147 patients suffering
from mild to moderate depression as classified in the Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders, 4th ed. (DSM-IV) of the American Psychiatric Association (102). The patients received either 900 mg of one of the extracts or a
placebo daily for 42 days. The patients who received the extract containing 5%
hyperforin showed the largest decrease in the Hamilton Depression Rating
Scale (a reduction of 10.3; P = 0.004, compared to the placebo). A reduction of
8.5 following treatment with the extract containing 0.5% hyperforin and of 7.9
in the placebo-treated group was seen (20).
In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 12 healthy volunteers
treated with a dried hydromethanolic extract of the herb (300 mg three times
daily for 4 weeks) showed improved sleep quality with an increase in deepsleep phases (25). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 54
healthy volunteers evaluated the central pharmacodynamic effects of two
extracts of the herb with different hyperforin contents (0.5% or 5.0%) but identical hypericin content. Healthy volunteers received either 900 mg (300 mg three
times daily) of one of the extracts or a placebo daily for 8 days. A quantitative
topographic electroencephalogram (qEEG) was performed on days 1 and 8 as
an indicator of drug-induced pharmacological activity. In both treatment
groups, reproducible central pharmacodynamic effects were observed between
4 and 8 hours after administration, and were confirmed on day 8. The extract
containing 5% hyperforin showed a marked tendency to produce greater
increases in qEEG baseline power performances than the extract containing
0.5% hyperforin. Higher baseline outputs were observed on day 8 in the
delta-, theta- and alpha-1 frequencies. Patients treated with the extract containing 5% hyperforin had an increase in qEEG power performance in the deltafrequency after a single dose and in the theta- and alpha-1 frequencies after
8 days of treatment, when compared with placebo treatment (103).
In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 12 healthy volunteers were treated with 900 mg (300 mg three times daily) of a dried
hydromethanolic extract of the herb for 6 weeks, and the effects on the EEG
were assessed. A reduction in alpha-activity and audiovisual latencies in
evoked potentials and an increase in beta- and theta-activities were demonstrated (104). Another randomized, double-blind, clinical trial of 24 healthy volunteers compared the effects of a dried hydromethanolic extract of the herb
with those of maprotiline on the resting EEG and audio-visual latencies in
evoked potentials. After 4 weeks of treatment, an increase in theta- and beta2 activity was observed in patients treated with 900 mg of a standardized
hydroalcoholic extract (300 mg three times daily), while a decrease in thetaactivity was seen in patients treated with 30 mg maprotiline (10 mg three times
161

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
daily) (105). The extract also induced an increase of deep sleep as demonstrated
by visual analysis of the sleeping phases and automatic analysis of slow-wave
EEG activities. Rapid eye movement sleep was not influenced (25).
A randomized, single-blind study evaluated the efficacy of the herb for the
treatment of seasonal affective disorders (SAD) in conjunction with light
therapy. Twenty patients with SAD were treated with 900 mg (300 mg three
times daily) of a hydroalcoholic extract of the herb daily for 4 weeks, combined
with either bright (3000 lux) or dim light (<300 lux) conditions. Light therapy
was carried out for 2 hours daily. A significant reduction of the Hamilton
Depression Rating Scale in both groups, but no statistically significant difference between the two groups, was observed (106, 107).
Photodynamic effects
The photodynamic effects of hypericin, incorporated into a non-ionic
hydrophilic ointment base, were assessed after external application to the skin
of patients with herpes communis. The infected dermal surface of treated
patients recovered rapidly and the effects lasted in most cases (33).
Pharmacokinetics
Single-dose pharmacokinetics of hypericin and pseudohypericin were determined in 12 healthy male volunteers. After a single dose of 300, 900 or
1800 mg extract (equivalent to 250, 750 or 1500 mg hypericin, respectively, and
526, 1578 or 3156 mg pseudohypericin, respectively), plasma levels of the hypericins were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography for up to 3
days. The median plasma levels were 1.5, 4.1 and 14.2 ng/ml for hypericin, and
2.7, 11.7 and 30.6 ng/ml for pseudohypericin, for the three stated doses, respectively. The median half-life of hypericin was 24.8–26.5 hours and 16.3–36.0
hours for pseudohypericin. The median lag-time of absorption was 2.0–2.6
hours for hypericin and 0.3–1.1 hours for pseudohypericin. During long-term
dosing (900 mg daily), a steady state was reached after 4 days. The mean
maximum plasma level during the steady state was 8.5 ng/ml for hypericin and
5.8 ng/ml for pseudohypericin (108).
A randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial was performed to evaluate
the pharmacokinetics and dermal photosensitivity of hypericin and pseudohypericin in 13 healthy volunteers after administration of a single dose of either
a placebo or 900, 1800 or 3600 mg of the extract (equivalent to 0.00, 2.81, 5.62
and 11.25 mg total hypericin [combined hypericin and pseudohypericin],
respectively). The maximum total hypericin plasma levels observed at 4 hours
after administration were 0, 28, 61 and 159 ng/l, respectively. Before and 4 hours
after drug intake, the subjects were exposed to increasing doses of solarsimulated irradiation on small areas of their backs. No dose-related increase in
light sensitivity was observed. In the multiple-dose analysis, 50 healthy volunteers received 600 mg extract of the herb three times during 1 day only. A
slight increase in solar-simulated irradiation sensitivity was observed (109).
162

Herba Hyperici
In a randomized, four-way crossover study without controls involving
six healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of hyperforin were determined
after administration of single doses of 300, 600, 900 or 1200 mg of an alcohol
extract containing 5% hyperforin. The maximum plasma level of hyperforin
(150 ng/ml) was reached 3.5 hours after administration of 300 mg of the extract.
The hyperforin half-life and mean residence time were 9 and 12 hours, respectively. The pharmacokinetics were linear up to 600 mg of the extract. Increasing the dose to 900 or 1200 mg of extract resulted in values for maximum
clearance and area under the curve lower than those expected from linear
extrapolation of data from the lower doses (110). The pharmacokinetics of
hyperforin were studied in nine healthy volunteers, as part of a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled study of 54 subjects. The subjects received
either a single dose of 900 mg of an alcohol extract containing 5% hyperforin,
or 300 mg of an alcohol extract containing 5% hyperforin three times daily for
8 days. No accumulation of hyperforin in the plasma was observed. On the
basis of the area under the curve values from the multiple-dose study, the estimated steady-state plasma concentration of hyperforin was approximately
100 ng/ml (110).

Contraindications
Herba Hyperici is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of the
Clusiaceae family.

Warnings
As with other antidepressant drugs, observation of the therapeutic effects of
Herba Hyperici may require 2–4 weeks of therapy. If a significant antidepressant effect is not observed after 6 weeks of treatment, a physician should be
consulted.

Precautions
General
Ultraviolet treatments or prolonged exposure to direct sunlight should be
avoided when Herba Hyperici is used, as photosensitization may occur in lightsensitive individuals (32). (See Adverse reactions.)

Drug interactions
Although the ingestion of foods containing high concentrations of tyramine
such as pickled or smoked foods and cheese, and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors such as fluoxetine are contraindicated with MAO inhibitors, in vivo
data linking Herba Hyperici to MAO inhibition are lacking (111, 112). The com163

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
bination of Herba Hyperici with other standard antidepressant drugs, such as
tricyclic antidepressants or fluoxetine, is not recommended, unless under
medical supervision.
There are now numerous reports in the medical literature indicating that
Herba Hyperici extracts induce hepatic enzymes that are responsible for drug
metabolism and may reduce the serum levels and therapeutic efficacy of drugs
(113–117). Coadministration of theophylline with a Herba Hyperici extract
lowered the serum level of theophylline in a patient previously stabilized,
requiring an increase in the theophylline dose (113). Coadministration of Herba
Hyperici and digoxin reduced serum digoxin concentrations after 10 days of
treatment (114). A decrease in serum cyclosporin, warfarin and phenprocoumon concentrations was seen in patients after they had additionally taken
Herba Hyperici extracts (115). Concomitant use of Herba Hyperici in five
patients previously stabilized on serotonin-reuptake inhibitors resulted in
symptoms of central serotonin excess (116). The United States Food and Drug
Administration has publicized a report concerning a significant drug interaction
between Herba Hyperici and indinavir, a protease inhibitor used to treat HIV
infections (117). Herba Hyperici substantially reduced indinavir plasma concentrations, due to induction of the cytochrome P450 metabolic pathway. As
a consequence, the concomitant use of Herba Hyperici and protease inhibitors
or non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors is not recommended and may
result in suboptimal antiretroviral drug concentrations, leading to a loss of virucidal activity and the development of resistance (117).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
The mutagenicity of hydroalcoholic extracts of Herba Hyperici containing
0.2–0.3% hypericin and 0.35 mg/g quercetin has been studied in various in vitro
and in vivo systems (118–121). The in vitro studies were performed using the
Salmonella/microsome assay, hypoxanthine guanidine phosphoribosyl transferase test (up to 4 ml/ml), unscheduled DNA synthesis test (up to 1.37 ml/ml),
cell transformation test in Syrian hamster embryo cells (up to 10 ml/ml) and spot
test in mice (up to 10 ml/ml). The in vivo tests included the chromosome aberration test with bone marrow cells of Chinese hamsters (10 ml/kg body weight,
gastric lavage) and the micronucleus test in rodent bone marrow (2 g/kg body
weight, gastric lavage). Although some positive results were observed in vitro
in the Salmonella/microsome assay (119, 121), all the in vivo tests were negative, indicating that the hydroalcoholic extract was not mutagenic in animals.
In a 26-week study, intragastric administration of the hydroalcoholic extract to
rats and dogs (900 and 2700 mg/kg body weight) had no effect on fertility,
development of the embryo, or pre- or postnatal development (122).

Other precautions
No information available on precautions concerning drug and laboratory test
interactions; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy; nursing
164

Herba Hyperici
mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore, Herba Hyperici should not be administered during pregnancy or lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Phototoxicity has been reported in cattle after ingestion of H. perforatum during
grazing. However, the doses were estimated to be approximately 30–50 times
higher than normal therapeutic doses (123). Photosensitization in lightsensitive individuals has been demonstrated in a controlled clinical trial involving metered doses of hypericin and exposure to ultraviolet A and B irradiation.
Patients were treated with 600 mg of a hydroalcoholic extract of the herb (containing 0.24–0.32% total hypericin) three times daily for 15 days. A measurable increase in erythema in light-sensitive individuals was observed after
ultraviolet A irradiation. The plasma concentration of hypericin and pseudohypericin in these subjects was double that seen during normal therapeutic
treatment of depression (124). A single case of reversible erythema after exposure to ultraviolet B has been reported in one patient who had been taking the
herb for 3 years (125). A single case of acute neuropathy after exposure to sunlight has been reported in one patient taking the herb (126). Drug-monitoring
studies indicate that side-effects of the herb are rare and mild, and include
minor gastrointestinal irritations, allergic reactions, tiredness and restlessness.
However, these studies did not last longer than 8 weeks (21, 24, 31). Clinical
studies have suggested that the use of the herb does not affect general performance or the ability to drive (127, 128).

Dosage forms
Dried crude drug for decoction, powdered drug or extracts in capsules, tablets,
tinctures and drops (2, 7, 32). Topical preparations include the oil, infusions,
compresses, gels and ointments. Store in a well-closed container, protected
from light (10, 11).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 2–4 g crude drug (32). Internal use: standardized tinctures or
fluidextracts (23, 98, 100), or standardized hydroethanolic or dried hydromethanolic extracts, up to a daily dose of 900 mg extract (equivalent to 0.2–
2.7 mg total hypericin) (19, 21, 22, 27, 31).

References
1. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
2. American herbal pharmacopeia and therapeutic compendium. Santa Cruz, CA, American
Herbal Pharmacopeia, 1997.
3. St John’s wort. In: The United States pharmacopeia 24: national formulary 19. Rockville,
MD, United States Pharmacopeial Convention, 2000:2509–2510.

165

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hägers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Pignatti S. Flora Italica. Torino, Unione Tipografico Editrice Torinese, 1982.
7. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
1994.
8. Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Hypericum perforatum. Fitoterapia, 1995, 66:43–68.
9. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
10. Pharmacopoea helvetica, 8th ed. Berne, Département fédéral de l’intérieur, 1997.
11. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
12. Piperopoulos G et al. Determination of naphthodianthrones in plant extracts from
Hypericum perforatum L. by liquid chromatography–electrospray mass spectrometry.
Journal of Chromatography B: Biomedical Applications, 1997, 695:309–316.
13. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
14. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
15. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
16. Brolis M et al. Identification by high-performance liquid chromatography–diode
array detection–mass spectrometry and quantification by high-performance liquid
chromatography–UV absorbance detection of active constituents of Hypericum
perforatum. Journal of Chromatography A, 1998, 825:9–16.
17. Nahrstedt A, Butterweck V. Biologically active and other chemical constituents of
the herb of Hypericum perforatum L. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:129–134.
18. International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, Tenth revision
(ICD-10), Volume 1. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1992.
19. Ernst E. St John’s wort, an antidepressant? A systematic, criteria-based review.
Phytomedicine, 1995, 2:67–71.
20. Laakmann G et al. St John’s wort in mild to moderate depression: the relevance of
hyperforin for the clinical efficacy. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1998, 31 (Suppl. 1):S54–S59.
21. Linde K et al. St John’s wort for depression—an overview and meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. British Medical Journal, 1996, 313:253–258.
22. Maisenbacher HJ et al. Therapie von Depressionen in der Praxis. Ergebnisse einer
Anwendungsbeobachtung mit Hyperici herba. Natura Medica, 1992, 7:394–399.
23. Pieschl D et al. Zur Behandlung von Depressionen. Verblindstudie mit einem
pflanzlichen Extrakt Johanniskraut. Therapiewoche, 1989, 39:2567–2571.
24. Schrader E et al. Hypericum treatment of mild–moderate depression in a placebocontrolled study. A prospective, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled,
multicentre study. Human Psychopharmacology, 1998, 13:163–169.
25. Schultz H, Jobert M. Effects of Hypericum extract on the sleep EEG in older volunteers. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S39–S43.
26. Schultz H et al. Clinical trials with phyto-psychopharmacological agents.
Phytomedicine, 1997, 4:379–387.
27. Volz HP. Controlled clinical trials of Hypericum extracts in depressed patients—an
overview. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:72–76.
28. Vorbach EU, Arnoldt KH, Hübner W-D. Efficacy and tolerability of St John’s wort
extract LI 160 versus imipramine in patients with severe depressive episodes
according to ICD-10. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:81–85.
29. Wheatley D. LI 160, an extract of St John’s wort, versus amitriptyline in mildly to
moderately depressed outpatients—a controlled 6-week clinical trial. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:77–80.

166

Herba Hyperici
30. Wheatley D. Hypericum extract: potential in the treatment of depression. CNS
Drugs, 1998, 9:431–440.
31. Woelk H et al. Benefits and risks of the Hypericum extract LI 160: drugmonitoring study with 3250 patients. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology,
1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S34–S38.
32. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin,
TX, American Botanical Council, 1998.
33. Ivan H. Preliminary investigations on the application of Hypericum perforatum in
herpes therapy. Gyogyszereszet, 1979, 23:217–218.
34. Öztürk Y. Testing the antidepressant effects of Hypericum species on animal models.
Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:125–128.
35. Okpanyi SN, Weischer ML. Tierexperimentelle Untersuchungen zur psychotropen
Wirksamkeit eines Hypericum-Extraktes. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1987, 37:10–
13.
36. Öztürk Y et al. Effects of Hypericum perforatum L. and Hypericum calycinum L. extracts
on the central nervous system in mice. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:139–146.
37. Chatterjee SS et al. Hyperforin as a possible antidepressant component of Hypericum extracts. Life Sciences, 1998, 63:499–510.
38. Bhattacharya SK, Chakrabaarti A, Chatterjee SS. Activity profiles of two
hyperforin-containing Hypericum extracts in behavioral models. Pharmacopsychiatry,
1998, 31 (Suppl. 1):S22–S29.
39. Dimpfel W et al. Effects of a methanolic extract and a hyperforin-enriched CO2
extract of St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) on intracerebral field potentials in
the freely moving rat. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1998, 31 (Suppl. 1):S30–S35.
40. Butterweck V et al. Effects of the total extract and fractions of Hypericum perforatum in animal assays for antidepressant activity. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:
117–124.
41. Girzu M et al. Sedative activity in mice of a hydroalcohol extract of Hypericum
perforatum L. Phytotherapy Research, 1997, 11:395–397.
42. Mülder H, Zöller M. Antidepressive Wirkung eines auf den Wirkstoffkomplex
Hypericin standardisierten Hypericum-Extrakts. Biochemische und klinische Untersuchungen. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1984, 34:918–920.
43. Müller WE, Rossol R. Effects of Hypericum extract on the expression of serotonin
receptors. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S63–
S64.
44. Neary JT, Bu YR. Hypericum LI 160 inhibits uptake of serotonin and norepinephrine in astrocytes. Brain Research, 1999, 816:358–363.
45. Perovic S, Müller WEG. Pharmacological profile of Hypericum extract: effect
on serotonin uptake by postsynaptic receptors. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1995,
45:1145–1148.
46. Müller WE et al. Effects of Hypericum extract LI 160 on neurotransmitter uptake
systems and adrenergic receptor density. Second International Congress on Phytomedicine, Munich, 1996.
47. Cott J, Misra R. Medicinal plants: a potential source for new psychotherapeutic
drugs. In: Kanba S et al., eds. New drug development from herbal medicines in neuropsychopharmacology. New York, Brunner/Mazel Inc., 1997.
48. Wonnemann M et al. Effects of Hypericum extract on glutamatergic and gabaminergic receptor systems. Pharmazie, 1998, 53:38.
49. Chatterjee SS et al. Hyperforin inhibits synaptosomal uptake of neurotransmitters in vitro and shows antidepressant activity in vivo. Pharmazie, 1998, 53
(Suppl. 1):9.
50. Müller WE et al. Hyperforin represents the neurotransmitter reuptake inhibiting constituent of Hypericum extract. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1998, 31 (Suppl. 1):16–
21.

167

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
51. Baureithel KH et al. Inhibition of benzodiazepine binding in vitro by amentoflavone, a constituent of various species of Hypericum. Pharmaceutica Acta Helvetiae,
1997, 72:153–157.
52. Teufel-Mayer R, Gleitz J. Effects of long-term administration of Hypericum extracts
on the affinity and density of the central serotonergic 5-HT1 A and 5-HT2 A receptors. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:113–116.
53. Raffa RB. Screen of receptor and uptake-site activity of hypericin component of St
John’s wort reveals sigma receptor binding. Life Sciences, 1998, 62:PL265–PL270.
54. Suzuki O et al. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase by isogentisin and its 3-Oglucoside. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1978, 27:2075–2078.
55. Suzuki O et al. Inhibition of type A and type B monoamine oxidase by naturally
occurring xanthones. Planta Medica, 1981, 42:17–21.
56. Suzuki O et al. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase by hypericin. Planta Medica, 1984,
50:272–274.
57. Hölzl J et al. Investigation about antidepressive and mood-changing effects of
Hypericum perforatum. Planta Medica, 1989, 55:643.
58. Demisch L et al. Identification of selective MAO type A inhibitors in Hypericum
perforatum L. (Hyperforat®). Pharmacopsychiatry, 1989, 22:194.
59. Sparenberg B et al. Untersuchungen über antidepressive Wirkstoffe von Johanniskraut. Pharmazie Zeitschrift Wissenschaften, 1993, 138:50.
60. Höltje HD, Walper A. Molecular modeling of the antidepressive mechanism of
Hypericum ingredients. Nervenheilkunde, 1993, 12:339–340.
61. Bladt S, Wagner H. Inhibition of MAO by fractions and constituents of Hypericum
extract. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S57–S59.
62. Thiede HM, Walper A. Inhibition of MAO and COMT by Hypericum extracts and
hypericin. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S54–S56.
63. Thiele B et al. Modulation of cytokine expression by Hypericum extract. Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S60–S62.
64. Itokawa H et al. Studies on the constituents of crude drugs having inhibitory activity against contraction of the ileum caused by histamine or barium chloride. I.
Screening test for the activity of commercially available crude drugs and the related
plant materials. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1983, 37:223–228.
65. Zaitseva IM. The effect of common St John’s wort on the gastrointestinal system.
Zdravookhr Beloruss, 1966, 12:23.
66. Melzer R et al. Vasoactive properties of procyanidins from Hypericum perforatum L.
in isolated porcine coronary arteries. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1991, 41:481–483.
67. Barbagallo C, Chisari G. Antimicrobial activity of three Hypericum species. Fitoterapia, 1987, 58:175–177.
68. May G, Willuhn G. Antiviral activity of aqueous extracts from medicinal plants in
tissue cultures. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1978, 28:1–7.
69. Mishenkova EL et al. Antiviral properties of St John’s wort and preparations
produced from it. Trudy S’ezda mikrobiologii Ukrainskoi, 1975, 4:222.
70. Pacheco P et al. Antiviral activity of Chilean medicinal plant extracts. Phytotherapy
Research, 1993, 7:415–418.
71. Anderson DO et al. In vitro virucidal activity of selected anthraquinones and
anthraquinone derivatives. Antiviral Research, 1991, 162:185–196.
72. Carpenter S, Kraus GA. Photosensitization is required for inactivation of equine
infectious anemia virus by hypericin. Photochemistry and Photobiology, 1991, 53:
169–174.
73. Hudson JB et al. Antiviral assays on phytopharmaceuticals: the influence of reaction parameters. Planta Medica, 1994, 604:329–332.
74. Lavie G et al. Hypericin as an antiretroviral agent. Mode of action and related
analogues. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1992:556–562.

168

Herba Hyperici
75. Lopez-Bazzocchi I et al. Antiviral activity of the photoactive plant pigment hypericin. Photochemistry and Photobiology, 1991, 54:95–98.
76. Moraleda G et al. Inhibition of duck hepatitis B virus replication by hypericin.
Antiviral Research, 1993, 20:223–247.
77. Wood S et al. Antiviral activity of naturally occurring anthraquinones and anthraquinone derivatives. Planta Medica, 1990, 56:651–652.
78. Cohen PA et al. Antiviral activities of anthraquinones, bianthrones and hypericin
derivatives from lichens. Experientia, 1996, 523:180–183.
79. Degar S et al. Inactivation of the human immunodeficiency virus by hypericin: evidence for photochemical alterations of p24 and a block in uncoating. AIDS Research
and Human Retroviruses, 1992, 8:1929–1936.
80. Lavie G et al. Studies of the mechanisms of action of the antiretroviral agents
hypericin and pseudohypericin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 1989, 86:5963–5967.
81. Meruelo D et al. Therapeutic agents with dramatic antiretroviral activity and
little toxicity at effective doses: aromatic polycyclic diones hypericin and pseudohypericin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
1988, 85:5230–5234.
82. Tang J et al. Virucidal activity of hypericin against enveloped and non-enveloped
DNA and RNA viruses. Antiviral Research, 1990, 136:313–325.
83. Weber ND et al. The antiviral agent hypericin has in vitro activity against HSV-1
through non-specific association with viral and cellular membranes. Antiviral Chemistry and Chemotherapy, 1994, 5:83–90.
84. Schinazi RF et al. Anthraquinones as a new class of antiviral agents against human
immunodeficiency virus. Antiviral Research, 1990, 135:265–272.
85. Fokina GI et al. Experimental phytotherapy of tick-borne encephalitis. Soviet Progress in Virology, 1991, 1:27–31.
86. Lenard J et al. Photodynamic inactivation of infectivity of human immunodeficiency virus and other enveloped viruses using hypericin and Rose bengal: inhibition of fusion and syncytia formation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 1993, 901:158–162.
87. Agostinis P et al. Photosensitized inhibition of growth factor-regulated protein
kinases by hypericin. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1995, 4911:1615–1622.
88. Agostinis P et al. A comparative analysis of the photosensitized inhibition of
growth factor-regulated protein kinases by hypericin derivatives. Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications, 1996, 2203:613–617.
89. De Witte PA et al. Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
activity by hypericin. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1993, 46:1929–1936.
90. Lavie G et al. The chemical and biological properties of hypericin A compound
with a broad spectrum of biological activities. Medical Research Reviews, 1995,
152:111–119.
91. Samel D, De Witte P. Selective inhibition of PK-C activity by Fagopyrum esculentum
extract. Phytotherapy Research, 1996, 10 (Suppl. 1):S156–S158.
92. Zhang W et al. Enhancement of radiosensitivity in human malignant glioma cells
by hypericin in vitro. Clinical Cancer Research, 1996, 25:843–846.
93. Couldwell WT et al. Hypericin: a potential antiglioma therapy. Neurosurgery, 1994,
35:705–710.
94. Panossian AG et al. Immunosuppressive effects of hypericin on stimulated human
leucocytes: inhibition of the arachidonic acid release, leukotriene B4 and
interleukin-1a production and activation of nitric oxide formation. Phytomedicine,
1996, 3:19–28.
95. Fedorchuk AM. Effect of Hypericum perforatum on experimentally infected wounds.
Mikrobiologichnii Zhurnal (Kiev), 1964, 26:32.

169

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
96. Lazareva KN et al. The results of a study of some drug plants of the Bashkir
USSR. Sbornik Nauchnykh Trudov Bashkir Gosudarstvennogo Meditsinskii Institut, 1968,
17:54.
97. Rao SG et al. Calendula and Hypericum: two homeopathic drugs promoting wound
healing in rats. Fitoterapia, 1991, 62:508–510.
98. Daniel K. Kurze Mitteilung über 12 jährige therapeutische Erfahrungen mit
Hypericin. Klinische Wochenschrift, 1951, 29:260–262.
99. Schakau D et al. Risk/benefit profile of St John’s wort extract. Psychopharmakotherapie, 1996, 3:116–122.
100. Kugler J et al. Therapie depressiver Zustände. Hypericum-Extrakt Steigerwald als
Alternative zur Benzodiazepin-Behandlung. Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Medizin, 1990,
66:21–29.
101. Demisch L et al. Einfluss einer subchronischen Gabe von Hyperforat auf die
nächtliche Melatonin- und Kortisolsekretion bei Probanden. Nünberg, Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Neuropsychopharmakologie und Pharmakopsychiatrie Symposium Abstract 1991.
102. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 4th ed. Washington, DC,
American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
103. Schellenberg R et al. Pharmacodynamic effects of two different Hypericum extracts
in healthy volunteers measured by quantitative EEG. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1998, 31
(Suppl. 1):S44–S53.
104. Johnson D. Neurophysiologische Wirkungen von Hypericum im Doppelblindversuch mit Probanden. Nervenheilkunde, 1991, 10:316–317.
105. Johnson D et al. Effects of Hypericum extract LI 160 compared with maprotiline on
resting EEG and evoked potentials in 24 volunteers. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S44–S46.
106. Martinez B et al. Hypericum in the treatment of seasonal affective disorders. Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S29–S33.
107. Kasper S. Treatment of seasonal affective disorder (SAD) with Hypericum extract.
Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30 (Suppl. 1):S89–S93.
108. Staffeldt B et al. Pharmacokinetics of hypericin and pseudohypericin after oral
intake of the Hypericum perforatum extract LI 160 in healthy volunteers. Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1994, 7 (Suppl. 1):S47–S53.
109. Brockmöller J et al. Hypericin and pseudohypericin: pharmacokinetics and effects
on photosensitivity in humans. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30:94–101.
110. Biber A et al. Oral bioavailability of hyperforin from Hypericum extracts in rats and
human volunteers. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1998, 31 (Suppl. 1):S36–S43.
111. Konig CD. Hypericum perforatum L. (gemeines Johanniskraut) als Therapeutikum bei
depressiven Verstimmungszuständen—eine Alternative zu synthetischen Arzneimitteln?
[Dissertation]. Basel, University of Basel, 1993.
112. Cott JM. In vitro receptor binding and enzyme inhibition by Hypericum perforatum
extract. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997, 30 (Suppl. 1):S108–S112.
113. Nebel A et al. Potential metabolic interaction between St John’s wort and theophylline. Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 1999, 33:502.
114. Johne A et al. Interaction of St John’s wort extract with digoxin. In: Jahreskongress
für klinische Pharmakologie. Berlin, 1999.
115. Ernst E. Second thoughts about safety of St John’s wort. Lancet, 1999, 354:
2014–2016.
116. Lantz MS, Buchalter E, Giambanco V. St John’s wort and antidepressant drug interactions in the elderly. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 1999, 12:7–10.
117. Piscitelli SC et al. Indinavir concentrations and St John’s wort. Lancet, 2000,
355:547–548.
118. Okpanyi SN et al. Genotoxizität eines standardisierten Hypericum Extrakts.
Arzneimittel–Forschung, 1990, 40:851–855.

170

Herba Hyperici
119. Poginsky B et al. Johanniskraut (Hypericum perforatum L.). Genotoxizität bedingt
durch den Quercetingehalt. Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung, 1988, 128:1364–1366.
120. Schimmer O et al. The mutagenic potencies of plant extracts containing quercetin
in Salmonella typhimurium TA 98 and TA 100. Mutation Research, 1988, 206:201–208.
121. Schimmer O et al. An evaluation of 55 commercial plant extracts in the Ames
mutagenicity test. Pharmazie, 1994, 49:448–451.
122. Leuschner J. Preclinical toxicological profile of Hypericum extract LI 160. Second
International Congress on Phytomedicine. Munich, 1996.
123. Siegers CP et al. Zur Frage der Phototoxizität von Hypericum. Nervenheilkunde, 1993,
12:320–322.
124. Roots I et al. Evaluation of photosensitization of the skin upon single and multiple
dose intake of Hypericum extract. In: Second International Congress on Phytomedicine.
Munich, 1996.
125. Golsch S et al. Reversible Erhöhung der Photosensitivität im UV-B-Bereich durch
Johanniskrautextrakt-Präparate. Hautarzt, 1997, 48:249–252.
126. Bove GM. Acute neuropathy after exposure to sun in a patient treated with St
John’s wort. Lancet, 1998, 352:1121.
127. Herberg KW. Psychotrope Phytopharmaka im Test. Alternative zu synthetischen
Psychopharmaka? Therapiewoche, 1994, 44:704–713.
128. Schmidt U et al. Johanniskraut-Extrakt zur ambulanten Therapie der Depression.
Aufmerksamkeit und Reaktionsvermögen bleiben erhalten. Fortschritt der Medizin,
1993, 111:339–342.

171

Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae

Definition
Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae is the essential oil obtained by steam distillation of the leaves and terminal branchlets of Melaleuca alternifolia (Maiden
and Betche) Cheel (Myrtaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
No information available.

Selected vernacular names
Australian tea tree, tea tree (1–5).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to Australia, where it is grown commercially (6, 7).

Description
A narrow-leaved tree not exceeding 6 m. Entire plant glabrous; leaves alternate.
Flowers scattered in an interrupted spike; stamens more than 12 mm long
united at their bases to form 5 distinct bundles; capsule persisting within fruiting hypanthium (6–8).

Plant material of interest: essential oil
General appearance
A colourless to pale-yellow liquid (1–3).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: myristic (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
Not applicable.
172

Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae

Powdered plant material
Not applicable.

General identity tests
Physico-chemical properties, thin-layer and gas chromatography (1, 2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (9).

Chemical
Refractive index: 1.475–1.482 (1–3);
Optical rotation: +5° to +15° (1–3);
Relative density: 0.885–0.906 (1–3);
Solubility in alcohol: soluble in two volumes of 85% ethanol at 20°C (1–3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (10). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (10), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (9) and
pesticide residues (11).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (9).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (9) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 30% (w/w) of terpinen-4-ol (4-terpineol) and not more
than 15% (w/w) of 1,8-cineole (also known as cineol, cineole or eucalyptol) (1,
2). The oil must contain: not less than 3.5% sabine; 1–6% a-terpinene; 10–28%
g-terpinene; 0.5–12.0% p-cymene; not less than 30% terpinen-4-ol; and
1.5–8.0% a-terpineol, as measured by gas chromatography (1–3).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are terpinen-4-ol (29–45%), g-terpinene (10–28%),
a-terpinene (2.7–13.0%) and 1,8-cineole (4.5–16.5%) (8, 12–15). Other mono173

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
terpenes present in significant quantities (1–5%) include a-pinene, limonene,
p-cymene and terpinolene. The structures of the major monoterpenes are presented below.
CH3
O
CH3
CH3

CH3

CH3

H3C

CH3

H3C

H 3C

1,8-cineole
(eucalyptol)

OH CH3

CH3

CH3

a-terpinene

g-terpinene

and enantiomer
terpinen-4-ol
(4-terpineol)

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Topical application for symptomatic treatment of common skin disorders such
as acne, tinea pedis, bromidrosis, furunculosis, and mycotic onychia (onychomycosis), and of vaginitis due to Trichomonas vaginalis or Candida albicans,
cystitis and cervicitis (16–23).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As an antiseptic and disinfectant for the treatment of wounds (5).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Symptomatic treatment of burns, colitis, coughs and colds, gingivitis, impetigo,
nasopharyngitis, psoriasis, sinus congestion, stomatitis and tonsillitis (24, 25).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial activity
Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae inhibited the growth in vitro of
Escherichia coli, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus,
metacillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, and a variety of Streptomyces species
(MIC 0.04–0.50%) (26–30). It also inhibited the growth in vitro of Trichophyton
mentagrophytes, Trichophyton rubrum, Microsporum canis, Malassezia furfur, Candida
albicans, Cryptococcus neoformans, Pityrospermum ovale and Trichosporon cutaneum
(MIC 1.1–2.2 mg/ml) (31–35). The susceptibility of 32 strains of Propionibacterium acnes to the essential oil was determined using a broth dilution method.
The MIC was 0.25% for five strains, and 0.50% for the other strains (36).
Several chemical constituents of the oil, linalool, terpinen-4-ol, a-terpineol,
174

Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae
a-terpinene, terpinolene and 1,8-cineole, inhibited the growth in vitro of a wide
variety of microorganisms, including Candida albicans, Escherichia coli and
Staphylococcus aureus (MIC 0.06–0.50% v/v) (27).
Toxicology
The dermal median lethal dose (LD50) of the essential oil in rabbits is >5.0 mg/kg
body weight, since 5.0 mg/kg resulted in the deaths of two out of 10 treated
rabbits (37). The oral LD50 in rats is 1.9 g/kg body weight (range of doses 1.4–
2.7 g/kg) (24, 25, 37, 38). The signs of severe toxicity are respiratory distress,
and coma with diarrhoea (26, 38). A few cases of toxicosis after topical application of high doses of the essential oil to dogs and cats have been reported.
Symptoms included central nervous system depression, weakness, and lack of
coordination and muscle tremors that were resolved within 2–3 days after supportive treatment (39).

Clinical pharmacology
Vaginitis and cervicitis
A study without controls assessed the safety and efficacy of a 40% emulsified
solution of Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae in 13% isopropyl alcohol in
the treatment of 130 women with cervicitis or vaginitis due to Trichomonas vaginalis or vaginitis due to Candida albicans. Intravaginal application of tampons
saturated with a 20% emulsified solution healed cervicitis due to Trichomonas
vaginalis after four weekly treatments. In patients with vaginitis due to
Trichomonas vaginalis, intravaginal application of a 1% emulsified solution using
a saturated tampon, as well as vaginal douching, resulted in clinical cures and
restoration of the cervix (21). In another study without controls, 28 women
with vaginitis due to Candida albicans were treated with vaginal pessaries (containing 0.2 g essential oil) every night for 90 days. After 30 days of treatment,
24 patients were already free of symptoms such as leukorrhoea and burning
sensation, and 21 were free of Candida albicans (17).
Cystitis
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the efficacy of
the essential oil in the treatment of 26 women with chronic ideopathic
colibacilli cystitis. Patients were treated with 8 mg essential oil, in an enteric
capsule form, orally three times daily for 6 months. After treatment, 54% of
the essential oil-treated group were free of symptoms, compared with only
15% in the placebo group. However, approximately 50% of the asymptomatic
patients still showed evidence of colibacilli and leukocytes in their urine (17).
Acne
A randomized, single-blind, comparison trial evaluated the safety and efficacy
of topical application of a gel containing either 5% essential oil or 5% benzoyl
175

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
peroxide in the treatment of mild to moderate acne in 119 patients. The results
demonstrated that both preparations significantly reduced the number of
inflamed and non-inflamed lesions (open and closed comedones) after 3 months
of daily treatment (P < 0.001), although the onset of action of the gel containing the essential oil was slower than that of the gel containing benzoyl peroxide. Patients treated with the oil-containing gel reported fewer side-effects
than those treated with the benzoyl peroxide-containing gel (16).
Foot problems
A randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial evaluated the efficacy of a cream containing either 10% (w/w) essential oil, 1% tolnaftate or a
placebo in the treatment of 104 patients with tinea pedis due to Trichophyton
rubrum, T. mentagrophytes and Epidermophyton floccosum. After application of the
cream twice daily for 4 weeks, 30% of the essential oil-treated patients, 85%
of the tolnaftate-treated patients and 21% of the placebo-treated patients
showed conversion to a negative culture (P < 0.001). Both the essential oiltreated group and tolnaftate-treated group demonstrated significant improvement in the clinical symptoms of scaling, inflammation, itching and burning
sensation, compared with the placebo group (P < 0.001). The cream containing
the essential oil reduced symptomatology of tinea pedis as effectively as that
containing tolnaftate, but was no better than the placebo in achieving a mycological cure (22). A study without controls assessed the efficacy of three products in the treatment of 60 patients with tinea pedis due to Trichophyton rubrum,
T. mentagrophytes and Epidermophyton floccosum, as well as other conditions such
as bromidrosis, inflamed corns, calluses, bunions, fissures and mycotic onychia
(onychomycosis) of the toenails. Eight patients were treated with 100% essential oil, 40 patients were treated with a 40% emulsified solution of the essential oil in 13% isopropyl alcohol and 12 were treated with an ointment
containing 8% essential oil, twice daily for 3 weeks to 4 years. The 100% essential oil was assessed as fair to poor in the treatment of mycotic onychia. The
40% emulsified solution reduced the symptoms of bromidrosis, and inflammation of corns, calluses and bunions. The 8% ointment was effective in the
symptomatic treatment of tinea pedis due to T. mentagrophytes and Epidermophyton floccosum, but was less effective against T. rubrum (23).
A randomized, double-blind, multicentre comparison trial assessed the efficacy of 100% essential oil or 1% clotrimazole in the treatment of 117 patients
with distal subungual mycotic onychia. Patients received twice-daily applications for 6 months, and debridement and clinical assessment were performed
at 0, 1, 3 and 6 months. After 3 months, approximately 50% of each group
reported improvements. After 6 months, clinical assessment showed partial or
full resolution in approximately 60% of each group (19).
The efficacy of the essential oil was assessed in an open study of 35 patients
with furuncles on the axilla, back, ear, face, forearm, neck and scalp. The furuncles were painted with the essential oil two or three times daily, after thorough
176

Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae
cleaning. In the group treated with the essential oil, only one furuncle required
incision, and in 15 patients, the furuncles were completely cured after 8 days
of treatment. The only adverse reaction was slight temporary stinging reported
by three patients. In the untreated control group, furuncles on five of the 10
patients required incision and the infected site of the furuncles was still apparent after 8 days (20).

Contraindications
Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae is contraindicated in cases of known
allergy to plants of the Myrtaceae family.

Warnings
Not for internal use. Keep out of reach of children (see Adverse reactions).

Precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; carcinogenesis, mutagenesis,
impairment of fertility; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy;
nursing mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore, Aetheroleum Melaleucae
Alternifoliae should not be administered during pregnancy or lactation or to
children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Allergic contact dermatitis after external application and ingestion of
Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae has been reported (26, 40–44). No
adverse reactions were reported in two patch tests using preparations containing up to 5% essential oil (45, 46). Accidental ingestion of 10 ml essential oil
caused confusion, disorientation and loss of coordination in a 23-month-old
child (47). Ingestion of 2.5 ml essential oil by a 60-year-old man resulted in a
severe rash and a general feeling of malaise (48). Induction of a comatose state
lasting 12 hours, followed by 36 hours of a semi-conscious state accompanied
by hallucinations, was reported in one patient after ingestion of approximately
half a cup (120 ml) of the essential oil. Abdominal pain and diarrhoea lasting
up to 6 weeks were also reported (38).

Dosage forms
Essential oil (1, 2). Store in a well-filled, airtight container, protected from heat
and light.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
177

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
External application of the essential oil at concentrations of 5–100%, depending on the skin disorder being treated (16–23).

References
1. Essential oils—oil of Melaleuca, terpinen-4-ol type. AS 2782–1997. Sydney, Standards
Association of Australia, 1997.
2. Deutscher Arzneimittel-Codex, Suppl. 8. Stuttgart, Govi-Verlag, 1996.
3. Oil of Melaleuca, terpinen-4-ol type (tea tree oil). ISO 4730:1996(E). Geneva, International Organization for Standardization, 1996.
4. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, March 17, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
5. Osborne F, Chandler F. Australian tea tree oil. Canadian Pharmacy Journal, 1998,
131:42–46.
6. Cribb AB, Cribb JW. Useful wild plants in Australia. Sydney, Fontana/Collins, 1981.
7. Penfold AR, Morrison FR. Tea tree oils. In: Guenther E, ed. The essential oils. Vol. IV.
New York, NY, D. Van Norstrand Co., 1950:60–72.
8. Southwell I, Lowe R, eds. Tea tree. The genus Melaleuca. Sydney, Harwood Academic
Publishers, 1999.
9. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
10. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
11. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
12. Guenther E. Australian tea tree oils. Perfumery and Essential Oils Record, 1968:642–644.
13. Swords G, Hunter GLK. Composition of Australian tea tree oil (Melaleuca alternifolia). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 1978, 26:734–737.
14. Brophy JJ et al. Gas chromatographic quality control for oil of Melaleuca terpinen4-ol type (Australian tea tree). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 1989, 37:
1330–1335.
15. Verghese et al. Indian tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia Cheel) essential oil. Flavour and
Fragrance Journal, 1996, 11:219–221.
16. Bassett IB et al. A comparative study of tea tree oil versus benzoyl peroxide in the
treatment of acne. Medical Journal of Australia, 1990, 153:455–458.
17. Belaiche P. Letter to the editor. Phytotherapy Research, 1988, 2:157.
18. Blackwell AL. Tea tree oil and anaerobic (bacterial) vaginosis. Lancet, 1991, 337:300.
19. Buck DS et al. Comparison of two topical preparations for the treatment of onychomycosis: Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) oil and clotrimazole. Journal of Pharmacy
Practice, 1994, 38:601–605.
20. Feinblatt HM. Cajeput-type oil for the treatment of furunculosis. Journal of the
National Medical Association, 1960, 52:32–34.
21. Pena EF. Melaleuca alternifolia oil. Its use for trichomonal vaginitis and other vaginal
infections. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 1962, 19:793–795.
22. Tong MM et al. Tea tree oil in the treatment of tinea pedis. Australas Journal of Dermatology, 1992, 33:145–149.
23. Walker M. Clinical investigation of Australian Melaleuca alternifolia oil for a variety
of common foot problems. Current podiatry, 1972, 18:7–15.
24. Altman PM. Australian tea tree oil. Australian Journal of Pharmacy, 1988, 69:276–278.
25. Altman PM. Australian tea tree oil: a natural antiseptic. Australian Journal of Biotechnology, 1989, 3:247–248.

178

Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae
26. Carson CF, Riley TV. Toxicity of the essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia or tea tree
oil. Journal of Toxicology (Clinical Toxicology), 1995, 32:193–194.
27. Carson CF, Riley TV. Antimicrobial activity of the major components of the essential oils of Melaleuca alternifolia. Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 1995, 78:264–269.
28. Carson CF, Riley TV. In vitro activity of the essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia
against Streptococcus spp. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 1996, 37:1177–1178.
29. Chan CH, Loudon KW. Activity of tea tree oil on methacillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Journal of Hospital Infection, 1998, 39:244–245.
30. Nelson RRS. In vitro activities of five plant essential oils against methacillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium. Journal
of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 1997, 40:305–306.
31. Concha JM et al. Antifungal activity of Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) oil against
various pathogenic organisms. Journal of the American Podiatry Medical Association,
1998, 88:489–492.
32. Hammer KA et al. In vitro activity of essential oils, in particular Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) and tea tree oil products, against Candida spp. Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, 1998, 42:591–595.
33. Nenoff P et al. Antifungal activity of the essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree
oil) against pathogenic fungi in vitro. Skin Pharmacology, 1996, 9:388–394.
34. Viollon C, Chaumont JP. Antifungal properties of essential oils and their main components upon Cryptococcus neoformans. Mycopathologia, 1994, 128:151–153.
35. Williams LR et al. Therapeutic use for tea tree oil. Australian Journal of Pharmacy,
1997, 78:285–287.
36. Carson CF, Riley TV. Susceptibility of Propionibacterium acnes to the essential oil of
Melaleuca alternifolia. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 1994, 19:24–25.
37. Carson CF et al. Efficacy and safety of tea tree oil as a topical antimicrobial agent.
Journal of Hospital Infection, 1998, 40:175–178.
38. Seawright A. Tea tree oil poisoning (comment). Medical Journal of Australia, 1993,
159:831.
39. Villar D et al. Toxicity of Melaleuca oil and related essential oils applied topically on
dogs and cats. Veterinary and Human Toxicology, 1994, 36:139–142.
40. Apted JH. Contact dermatitis associated with the use of tea tree oil. Australas journal
of dermatology, 1991, 32:177.
41. De Groot AC et al. Systemic contact dermatitis from tea tree oil. Contact Dermatitis,
1992, 27:279–280.
42. Knight TE, Hausen BM. Melaleuca oil (tea tree oil) dermatitis. Journal of the American
Academy of Dermatology, 1994, 30:423–427.
43. Selvaag E et al. Contact allergy to tea tree oil and cross-sensitization to colophony.
Contact Dermatitis, 1994, 31:124–125.
44. Van der Valk PGM et al. Allergisch contacteczeem voor “tea tree” olie. Nederlands
Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde, 1994, 138:823–825.
45. De Groot AC. Airborne allergic contact dermatitis from tea tree oil. Contact Dermatitis, 1996, 35:304–305.
46. Bhushan M, Beck MH. Allergic contact dermatitis from tea tree oil in a wart paint.
Contact Dermatitis, 1997, 36:117–118.
47. Jacobs MR, Hornfeldt CS. Melaleuca oil poisoning. Journal of Toxicology (Clinical
Toxicology), 1994, 32:461–464.
48. Elliott C. Tea tree oil poisoning. Medical Journal of Australia, 1993, 159:830–831.

179

Folium Melissae

Definition
Folium Melissae consists of the dried leaves of Melissa officinalis L. (Lamiaceae,
Labiatae) (1, 2).

Synonyms
Calamintha officinalis Moench. (3), Melissa graveolens Host, Thymus melissa E.H.L.
Krause (4). Lamiaceae is also referred to as Labiatae.

Selected vernacular names
Alahana, appiastro, badarendjabouya, badranjbuyeh, balm, balm mint, bee
balm, blue balm, cedronella, citromfülevél, citronelle, citrounado, citrounela,
citrounelo, common balm, cure-all, dropsy plant, erva-cidreira-miuda-de-folha,
folia citronellae, franjmeshk, garden-balm, Herzkraut, hhashyshat ennahhl,
honey plant, lemon balm, limiera, limouna, limounneta, mallisa, melissa,
Melisse, Melissenblätter, Melissenkraut, melisso, melliss, ponciarada, pouncinado, sidrunmeliss, sweet balm, toronjil, toronjil-cidrado, touroudjan, turungan,
Zitronenkraut, Zitronenmelisse (4–8).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to western Asia and the eastern Mediterranean region, and is cultivated in central, eastern and western Europe, and the United States of America
(4, 7, 8).

Description
An odorous perennial herb, 0.3–0.9 m high, usually with several stems, lemonscented on bruising. Stems obtusely quadrangular, furrowed pubescent. Leaves
2–9 cm long and 1–5 cm wide, ovate to obovate-oval, base cuneate truncate or
cordate at the base, densely pilose on both surfaces, petiole 0.2–3.5 cm long.
Corolla white or pinkish; infundibuliform tube 8–12 mm long; stamens inserted
deep in the tube; bracteoles oval-oblong, about 1.5 cm long, pubescent; calyx
5–9 mm long, pubescent outside, pubescent inside (with very short hairs),
densely pilose in the middle (4, 8, 9).
180

Folium Melissae

Plant material of interest: dried leaves
General appearance
Leaves oval, cordate, up to about 8 cm long and 5 cm wide, with more or less
long petioles; lamina thin, lower surface has conspicuous, raised, reticulate
venation; margins roughly dentate or crenate; upper surface bright green, lower
surface lighter in colour (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: aromatic, lemon-like; taste: aromatic, lemon-like (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Dorsoventral epidermal cells with sinuous walls and diacytic stomata on lower
surface only; very short, conical, unicellular covering trichomes with a finely
striated cuticle occur abundantly, especially over the veins on the lower surface;
also uniseriate, multicellular (2–5 cells) covering trichomes, wide at the base
and narrowing rapidly toward the tip, with slightly thickened, warty walls;
secretory trichomes also very abundant, some small with unicellular stalk and
unicellular or bicellular head, others large, of laminaceous type, with unicellular stalk and spherical to ovoid head composed of 8 cells (5).

Powdered plant material
Greenish. Fragments of the leaf epidermis with sinuous walls; short, conical,
unicellular covering trichomes with a finely striated cuticle; uniseriate, multicellular covering trichomes; 8-celled secretory trichomes of laminaceous type,
others with unicellular to tricellular stalks and unicellular or, more rarely, bicellular heads; diacytic stomata, on the lower surface only (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, and thin-layer chromatography for
rosmarinic, chlorogenic and caffeic acids (1).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (10).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% total foreign matter and not more than 10% of stem fragments with a diameter greater than 1 mm (1).
181

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Total ash
Not more than 12% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (11). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (11), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10) and
pesticide residues (12).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (10) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, acid-insoluble ash, sulfated ash, water-soluble extractive and
alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in accordance with national
requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 4.0% total hydroxycinnamic acids calculated as rosmarinic acid (1). Quantitative analysis is performed by spectrophotometry at
505 nm (1). Essential oil analysis is carried out according to the method
described in the European pharmacopoeia (1).

Major chemical constituents
The major characteristic constituents are the hydroxycinnamic acids (rosmarinic [up to 6%], p-coumaric, caffeic and chlorogenic acids), and an essential oil (0.02–0.37%) composed of more than 40% monoterpenes and more than
35% sesquiterpenes. The most significant terpenoid components are citral (a
mixture of the isomers neral and geranial), citronellal, geraniol, nerol, linalool,
farnesyl acetate, humulene (a-caryophyllene), b-caryophyllene and eremophilene. Other constituents include flavonoids, tannins and acidic triterpenes (e.g.
ursolic and oleanolic acids) (4, 6, 7, 13–15). The structures of the major compound, rosmarinic acid, and terpenoid components are presented below.
182

Folium Melissae
OH
CO2H
H

OH

O

HO
OH

O

rosmarinic acid

CH3
CH3

CH3
H3C

CH3

and enantiomer
citronellal

neral

CH3

H3C

CH3

CH3

H3C

and enantiomer
linalool

nerol

CH3

OH
CH2

OH

geraniol

CH3

H3C

H3C

OH

CH3

O

O

geranial

CH3

H CH3

H3C

O

CH3

CH3

H3C

O

H3C

CH3

O
farnesyl acetate

CH3

CH3
H
CH3

H3C
CH3
humulene
(a-caryophyllene)

H
H3C

CH2
CH3

b-caryophyllene

CH3
H

CH3
CH3

H

CH2

eremophilene

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Externally, for symptomatic treatment of herpes labialis (16–18).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Orally as a carminative for gastrointestinal disorders, and as a sedative for treatment of nervous disturbances of sleep (5, 15).
183

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of amenorrhoea, asthma, bee stings, coughs, dizziness, dysmenorrhoea, migraine headaches, tachycardia, toothache, tracheobronchitis and
urinary incontinence (6, 19).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antiviral activity
Aqueous extracts of Folium Melissae inhibited the replication in vitro of herpes
simplex virus type 2, influenza virus A2 (Mannheim 57) and vaccinia virus at a
concentration of 10% (20). A dried aqueous extract of the leaves inhibited the
replication of herpes simplex viruses in vitro at a concentration of 200 mg/ml
(18). A condensed tannin isolated from an aqueous extract of the leaves inhibited haemagglutination induced by Newcastle disease virus or mumps virus;
protected eggs and chick cell cultures from infection by Newcastle disease virus;
and prevented haemagglutination by Newcastle disease, mumps and
parainfluenza viruses 1, 2 and 3, but not by influenza viruses A and B (21).
A tannin-free polyphenol fraction of an aqueous extract of the leaves was
active against herpes simplex and vaccinia viruses in egg and cell culture
systems (22). Aqueous extracts of the leaves have also been reported to have
activity against Semliki Forest virus, influenza viruses and myxoviruses in vitro
(23, 24).
Antispasmodic activity
An ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited histamine- and barium-induced contractions of guinea-pig ileum in vitro (200 mg/ml), while an aqueous extract
was inactive (25). A 30% ethanol extract did not inhibit acetylcholine- and
histamine-induced contractions in guinea-pig ileum in vitro at concentrations
up to 10 ml/ml (26). The essential oil inhibited contractions in guinea-pig ileum,
rat duodenum and vas deferens, and rabbit jejunum and aorta in vitro (27, 28).
The essential oil also exhibited smooth muscle relaxant activity in guinea-pig
tracheal muscle (ED50 22 mg/ml) and in an electrically stimulated ileum myenteric plexus/longitudinal muscle preparation (ED50 7.8 mg/ml) (29).
Behavioural effects
Inhalation of the essential oil had a weak tranquillizing effect in mice (30).

Clinical pharmacology
An open multicentre study of 115 patients with herpes simplex infections of
the skin and transitional mucosa demonstrated that external applications of a
1% lyophilized aqueous extract of Folium Melissae in a cream base reduced
184

Folium Melissae
the healing time of herpetic lesions from 10–14 days to 6–8 days (18). Treatment with the cream also prolonged the recidivation-free intervals, as compared with other topical virustatic preparations containing idoxuridine and
tromantidine hydrochloride (16, 18). A subsequent randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 116 patients with herpes simplex infections of the
skin and transitional mucosa demonstrated a significant reduction in the size
of herpetic lesions within 5 days in patients treated with the same cream
(P = 0.01), as compared with placebo treatment (17, 18).

Contraindications
External use: none. Internal use: see Precautions.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A tincture of Folium Melissae was not mutagenic in vitro (31) and alcohol
extracts had antimutagenic activity in vitro (32).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Internal use: no information available. Therefore, Folium Melissae should not
be administered internally during pregnancy without medical supervision.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Internal use: no information available. Therefore, Folium Melissae should not
be administered internally during pregnancy without medical supervision.

Nursing mothers
Internal use: no information available. Therefore, Folium Melissae should not
be administered internally during lactation without medical supervision.

Paediatric use
Internal use: no information available. Therefore, Folium Melissae should not
be administered internally to children without medical supervision.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug interactions; or drug and laboratory test interactions; pregnancy.

Adverse reactions
No information available.
185

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Dosage forms
Comminuted crude drug; powder, tea bags, dried and fluidextracts for infusions
and other galenical preparations (7, 14, 15). Store in a tightly closed container,
protected from light (1). Do not store in plastic containers (7).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage for oral administration (for gastrointestinal disorders and as a
sedative for nervous disturbances of sleep).
Infusion: 1.5–4.5 g crude drug per cup several times daily as needed (15);
45% alcohol extract (1 : 1): 2–4 ml three times daily (5); tincture (1 : 5 in 45%
alcohol): 2–6 ml three times daily (14).
Daily dosage for topical application (for herpes labialis).
Cream containing 1% of a lyophilized aqueous extract applied 2–4 times
daily from the appearance of prodromal signs to a few days after the healing
of the lesions, for a maximum of 14 days (14, 18).

References
1. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
2. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Kanyvkiado, 1986.
3. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names in Latin, Arabic, Armenian,
English, French, German, Italian and Turkish languages. Cairo, Argus & Papazian Press,
1936.
4. Hänsel R et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Bd. 6: Drogen P–Z,
5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1994.
5. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
7. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
8. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
9. Backer CA, Backhuisen van den Brink RC, eds. Flora of Java. Vol. 2. Noordhof, NVP,
1965.
10. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
11. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
12. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
13. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
14. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal use of plant drugs. Fascicule 1. Elburg, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1996.
15. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
16. Wölbling RH, Milbradt R. Klinik und Therapie des Herpes simplex. Der Allgemeinarzt. Vorstellung eines neuen phytotherapeutischen Wirkstoffes. Therapiewoche,
1984, 34:1193–1200.

186

Folium Melissae
17. Vogt HJ et al. Melissenextrakt bei Herpes simplex. Allgemeinarzt, 1991, 13:832–841.
18. Wölbling RH, Leonhardt K. Local therapy of herpes simplex with dried extract from
Melissa officinalis. Phytomedicine, 1994, 1:25–31.
19. Boulos L. Medicinal plants of North Africa. Algonac, MI, Reference Publications Inc.,
1983.
20. May G, Willuhn G. Antiviral activity of aqueous extracts from medicinal plants in
tissue cultures. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1978, 28:1–7.
21. Kucera LS, Herrmann EC. Antiviral substances in plants of the mint family
(Labiatae). II. Tannin of Melissa officinalis. Proceedings of the Society of Experimental
Biology and Medicine, 1967, 124:865–869.
22. Herrmann EC, Kucera LS. Antiviral substances in plants of the mint family
(Labiatae). II. Nontannin polyphenol of Melissa officinalis. Proceedings of the Society of
Experimental Biology and Medicine, 1967, 124:869–874.
23. Van den Berghe DA et al. Present status and prospects of plant products as antiviral agents. In: Vlietinck AJ, Dommisse RA, eds. Advances in medicinal plant research.
Stuttgart, Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1985:47–99.
24. Konig B, Dustmann JH. The caffeoylics as a new family of natural compounds.
Naturwissenschaften, 1985, 72:659–661.
25. Itokawa H et al. Studies on the constituents of crude drugs having inhibitory activity against contraction of the ileum caused by histamine or barium chloride. I.
Screening test for the activity of commercially available crude drugs and the related
plant materials. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1983, 37:223–228.
26. Forster HB, Niklas H, Lutz S. Antispasmodic effects of some medicinal plants. Planta
Medica, 1980, 40:309–312.
27. Wagner H, Sprinkmeyer L. Über die pharmakologische Wirkung von Melissengeist.
Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung, 1973, 113:1159–1166.
28. Debelmas AM, Rochat J. Étude pharmacologique des huiles essentielles. Activité
antispasmodique etudiée sur une cinquantaine d’échantillons differents. Plantes
médicinales et Phytothérapie, 1967, 1:23–27.
29. Reiter M, Brandt W. Relaxant effects on tracheal and ileal smooth muscles of the
guinea-pig. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1985, 35:408–414.
30. Buchbauer G et al. Fragrance compounds and essential oils with sedative effects
upon inhalation. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1993, 82:660–664.
31. Schimmer O et al. An evaluation of 55 commercial plant extracts in the Ames
mutagenicity test. Pharmazie, 1994, 49:448–451.
32. Saigusa S et al. Antimutagenic activity of herbal extracts. II. Mechanism and DNArepair enhancement. Mutation Research, 1982, 182:375.

187

Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae

Definition
Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae is the essential oil obtained by steam distillation of the fresh overground parts of Mentha ¥ piperita L. (Lamiaceae) (1–4).

Synonyms
Mentha piperita (L.) Huds., M. piperita Stokes, M. balsamea Willd. (5, 6).

Selected vernacular names
Amentha, american mint, balm mint, brandy mint, cabra-caa, curled mint, doun
menta piperita, hierbabuena, hortela pimenta, Katzenkraut, lamb mint, la
menta, lamint, menta piemonte, mentea peperina, mentha pepe, menthe,
menthe anglaise, menthe poivrée, moto yuyo, nána, ni naa, ni’na el fulfully,
pepermin, pepper mint, peppermint, Pfefferminze, Pfefferminzblätter, piperita,
pudeena, pum hub, yerba mota (5–7).

Geographical distribution
Commercially cultivated in eastern and northern Europe and the United States
of America, and is found in Africa (1, 5, 8, 9).

Description
A perennial herb, 30–90 cm high. Stems square erect or ascending, branched,
the upper portion always quadrangular. Leaves opposite, petiolate, ovateoblong to oblong-lanceolate, serrate, pointed; dark green on the upper
surface. Flowers purplish, occur in thick, terminal, spicoid racemes of
verticillasters; each flower shows a tubular calyx with 5 sharp, hairy teeth, a
purplish, irregular, 4-cleft corolla, 4 short stamens, a 4-celled ovary and a
projecting style ending in a bifid stigma. Fruit consists of 4 ellipsoidal nutlets
(5, 8, 10).

Plant material of interest: essential oil
General appearance
A colourless, pale yellow or pale greenish-yellow liquid (1, 2).
188

Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic, penetrating; taste: characteristic, pungent, followed by a
sensation of cold (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
Not applicable.

Powdered plant material
Not applicable.

General identity tests
Thin-layer and gas chromatography for characteristic monoterpene profiles
(1, 2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (11).

Chemical
Acid value: not more than 1.4 (1, 2).
Relative density: 0.900–0.916 (1–3).
Refractive index: 1.457–1.467 (1–3).
Optical rotation: -10° to -30° (1–3).
Solvent solubility: miscible with ethanol (96%), ether and methylene chloride
(1, 2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (2). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (2), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (11) and
pesticide residues (12).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (11).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (11) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.
189

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Chemical assays
The monoterpene content determined by gas chromatography should be 1,8cineole (6–14%), limonene (1–5%), menthone (14–32%), menthofuran (1–9%),
isomenthone (2–10%), menthyl acetate (3–5%), menthol (30–55%), pulegone
(not more than 4.0%) and carvone (not more than 1.0%). The ratio of 1,8cineole to limonene should be greater than 2.0 (1, 2).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are menthol (30–55%) and menthone (14–32%).
Menthol occurs mostly in the free alcohol form, with small quantities as
the acetate (3–5%) and valerate esters. Other monoterpenes present include
isomenthone (2–10%), 1,8-cineole (6–14%), a-pinene (1.0–1.5%), b-pinene
(1–2%), limonene (1–5%), neomenthol (2.5–3.5%) and menthofuran (1–9%) (2,
6, 9, 13, 14). The structures of the major monoterpenes, menthol and menthone, are presented below.
H3C

H

OH

H

CH3
H

menthol

H3C

CH3

O

H

CH3
H

menthone

CH3

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Internally for symptomatic treatment of irritable bowel syndrome (15–20), and
digestive disorders such as flatulence and gastritis (21–23). Externally for treatment of myalgia and headache (21, 24–27).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Internally and externally for the symptomatic treatment of catarrh and coughs
(21, 22).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of dysentery, diabetes, dysmenorrhoea, fevers, jaundice and urinary
infections (7).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial activity
Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae inhibited the growth in vitro of Staphylococcus
aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus subtilis, Enterococcus faecalis and Escherichia
190

Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae
coli (28–30), but did not affect the growth of Bacillus cereus, Penicillium cyclopium
or Aspergillus aegyptiacus (28, 30). The essential oil inhibited the growth in vitro
of Trichophyton equinum and T. rubrum (at a concentration of 0.4 mg/ml) (31),
Aspergillus flavus, A. fumigatus and A. niger (32).
Antispasmodic activity
The essential oil had smooth muscle relaxant activity in guinea-pig ileum (ED50
26.0 mg/l) and trachea (ED50 87.0 mg/l) in vitro (33), and inhibited electrically
induced contractions of guinea-pig ileum (IC50 0.176 mg/ml) in vitro (34). The
essential oil decreased both the number and amplitude of spontaneous contractions, and inhibited spasms induced by barium chloride, pilocarpine and
physostigmine in isolated segments of rabbit and cat ileum (inhibitory concentrations 0.05 mg/ml) (35). The essential oil (0.5 mmol/l) inhibited smooth
muscle contractions of guinea-pig ileum in vitro induced by barium chloride,
carbachol, histamine and potassium chloride (36). Both the essential oil and
menthol act as calcium antagonists, since they inhibited the influx of calcium
ions through smooth muscle of guinea-pig ileum and taenia coli isolated from
humans (36–39). The essential oil and menthol inhibited smooth muscle contractions of guinea-pig ileum induced by potassium chloride (IC50 28.1 and
21 mg/ml, respectively) and induced electrically (11.5 and 7.7 mg/ml, respectively) (40). Both also inhibited 45Ca2+ uptake induced by potassium ion-dependent depolarization in brain synaptosomes and retinal neurons, and inhibited
specific binding of [3H]nitrendipine to ileal smooth muscle, synaptosomes and
retinal neurons (40). The essential oil relaxed carbachol-contracted guinea-pig
taenia coli (IC50 22.1 mg/ml), and inhibited spontaneous contractions in isolated
guinea-pig colon (IC50 25.9 mg/ml) and rabbit jejunum (IC50 15.2 mg/ml) (41). The
essential oil also attenuated contractile responses in guinea-pig taenia coli
induced by acetylcholine, histamine, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) and substance P (41). Contraction of Oddi’s sphincter induced by morphine was
reversed after intravenous administration of the essential oil to guinea-pigs
(1.0 mg/kg body weight). However, intravenous injection of the essential oil to
guinea-pigs (25 mg/kg body weight) was found to increase spasms of the
sphincter (42). Intragastric administration of the essential oil exhibited cholagogic activity in rats. This activity was attributed to (-)-menthol, a major constituent of the essential oil (43).
Antifoaming activity
The essential oil (0.1%) had antifoaming and carminative activity in vitro;
however, the antifoaming effect was less than that observed with a combination of dimethicone and silica (44).
Toxicology
Intragastric administration of the essential oil (100 mg/kg body weight) to rats
daily for 28 days induced histopathological changes (scattered cyst-like spaces)
191

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
in the white matter of the cerebellum. No behavioural or clinical symptoms
due to the encephalopathy were observed (45).

Clinical pharmacology
Antispasmodic activity
Irritable bowel syndrome
Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae is a carminative with antispasmodic activity
that reduces intracolonic pressure (22). In an open study of 20 patients, an
aqueous suspension of peppermint oil (British Pharmacopoeia Standard)
injected along the biopsy channel of a colonoscope relieved colonic spasms
within 30 seconds, allowing easier passage of the instrument or facilitating
polypectomy (16). The essential oil relaxed the oesophageal sphincter when
administered orally (15 drops [about 0.88 ml] oil in 30 ml water), decreasing the
pressure differential between the stomach and oesophagus, and allowing reflux
to occur (46).
In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover clinical trial, 18 patients with
symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome were treated daily with three entericcoated gelatin capsules, each containing either 0.2 ml essential oil or a placebo
for 3 weeks. Patients reported feeling significantly better while taking capsules
containing the essential oil than when taking those containing placebo (P <
0.01) and considered the essential oil significantly better than the placebo in
relieving abdominal symptoms (P < 0.005) (19). These results were confirmed
in a later study (15). A matched-pair, placebo-controlled trial assessed the efficacy of the essential oil in the treatment of 40 patients with symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. After 14 days of treatment with 1–2 enteric-coated
gelatin capsules containing either 0.2 ml essential oil or a placebo three times
daily, patients treated with the essential oil showed an increase in intestinal
transit time, and subjective improvement in the feeling of fullness, bloating,
bowel noises and abdominal pain, as compared with patients who received the
placebo (20).
Administration of the essential oil to patients undergoing barium enemas
relieved the associated colonic spasms (47, 48). However, two earlier trials
failed to confirm the antispasmodic and analgesic activity of the essential oil in
the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome (49, 50). A double-blind, placebocontrolled trial assessed the effects of peppermint oil in 34 patients with symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. After 4 weeks of treatment with two
capsules containing either 0.2 ml essential oil or a placebo three times daily,
patients treated with the essential oil showed no significant difference in their
overall symptoms, as compared with those who received the placebo treatment
(49).
A prospective, randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed
the efficacy and safety of enteric-coated capsules containing 0.2 ml essential
oil (one capsule 3–4 times daily for 1 month) for the symptomatic treatment
of 110 patients with irritable bowel syndrome. After treatment, 79% of patients
192

Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae
in the treatment group and 43% of those in the placebo group experienced alleviation of severe abdominal pain; 83% of the treated group and 32% of the
placebo group had reduced abdominal distention and a reduced stool frequency; 73% of the treated group and 31% of the placebo group had fewer
bowel noises; and 79% of the treated group and 22% of the placebo group had
less flatulence (17).
A review of five randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials
assessed the efficacy of the essential oil in the symptomatic treatment of irritable bowel syndrome (18). By measuring the improvement of symptoms, the
meta-analysis showed that two of the trials (49, 51) did not show a significant
difference between the essential oil and the placebo. However, three of the
trials demonstrated significant improvements in symptoms after treatment with
the essential oil (15, 19, 52). Although there were methodological flaws in most
of the trials analysed, the analysis suggested that there was a significant
positive effect of the essential oil (P < 0.001) on the symptomatic treatment of
irritable bowel syndrome, as compared with the placebo (18).
Dyspepsia
A double-blind, placebo-controlled multicentre study involving 45 patients
with non-ulcer dyspepsia assessed the change in pain intensity and Clinical
Global Impression Scale after treatment with an enteric-coated capsule containing a combination of the essential oil (90 mg) and caraway oil (50 mg). After
4 weeks of treatment with the essential oil/caraway oil capsules (one capsule
three times daily), 63% of patients were free of pain; 89.5% had less pain; and
94.5% showed improvements in the Clinical Global Impression Scale (23). In
another study, oral administration of the essential oil (0.2 ml) delayed the gastric
emptying time in healthy volunteers and in patients with dyspepsia (53).
Analgesic activity
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study assessed the
efficacy of a combination product of the essential oil (peppermint oil) and
Aetheroleum Eucalypti (eucalyptus oil) for headache relief in 32 patients. Five
different preparations were used (all in 90% ethanol, to a final weight of
100 g): 10 g peppermint oil and 5 g eucalyptus oil; 10 g peppermint oil and traces
of eucalyptus oil; traces of peppermint oil and 5 g eucalyptus oil; and traces of
both peppermint oil and eucalyptus oil; or a placebo. The test preparations or
placebo were applied topically to large areas of the forehead and temples, and
the effects on neurophysiological, psychological and experimental algesimetric
parameters were measured. The preparations improved cognitive performance,
and induced muscle relaxation and mental relaxation, but had no effect on sensitivity to headache (27). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
assessed the efficacy of the essential oil in the treatment of 41 patients suffering from chronic tension headache. At each headache episode, patients were
treated orally with two capsules of either paracetamol (1 g) or placebo, or exter193

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
nal application of 10% essential oil in ethanol, or a placebo solution. Compared
with the placebo solution, the 10% essential oil preparation produced a significant (P < 0.05) reduction in headache intensity within 15 minutes. Paracetamol was also more effective than the oral placebo but did not differ significantly
from topical treatment with the essential oil (54).

Contraindications
Preparations of Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae should not be used internally
by patients with inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract or gall bladder, or
with impaired liver function (21). Hypersensitivity to the essential oil has been
reported (55–57).

Warnings
Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae preparations should not be applied to the face,
especially the nose, of infants or young children (21, 22). Keep out of reach of
children.

Precautions
General
Patients with achlorhydria (due to medication with histamine H2 receptor
antagonists) should only use enteric-coated preparations (19, 58).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae was not mutagenic in the Salmonella/microsome assay using S. typhimurium strains TA98 and TA1535 (59).

Paediatric use
No information available. Therefore, Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae should
not be administered to children without medical supervision. (See also
Contraindications and Warnings.)

Other precautions
No information available on precautions concerning drug interactions; drug and
laboratory test interactions; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy; or nursing mothers. Therefore, Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae should
not be administered during pregnancy or lactation without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Following internal administration of Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae, gastric
complaints have been reported in individuals sensitive to the essential oil (21).
The use of non-enteric-coated essential oil preparations has occasionally caused
194

Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae
heartburn, especially in patients suffering from reflux oesophagitis (58). Skin
rashes, headache, heartburn, perianal burning, bradycardia, muscle tremors and
ataxia have been reported as rare side-effects, usually associated with overdose
(18, 56, 60–65). Recurrent muscle pain has been associated with the ingestion
of the essential oil (66). Following external administration of Aetheroleum
Menthae Piperitae, skin irritation has been reported (58).

Dosage forms
Essential oil, concentrated peppermint emulsion, peppermint spirit and other
galenic preparations (1, 21). Store in a well-closed container, protected from
light (1, 2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Internal use
For digestive disorders, daily dosage: 0.2–0.4 ml essential oil three times daily
in dilute preparations (58, 67) or suspensions (19). By inhalation: 3–4 drops
essential oil in hot water (21). Lozenges: 2–10 mg essential oil per lozenge (58).
For irritable bowel syndrome, daily dosage: 0.2–0.4 ml essential oil three
times daily in enteric-coated capsules (21, 58).
External use
5–20% essential oil in dilute, semisolid or oily preparations; 5–10% essential
oil in aqueous-ethanol; nasal ointments containing 1–5% crude drug (21).

References
1. British pharmacopoeia. Vol. I (International edition and addendum). London, Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1995.
2. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
3. Farmakope Indonesia Edisi Ketiga. Jakarta, Departemen Kesehatan, Republik Indonesia, 1979.
4. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
5. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
6. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
7. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
8. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
9. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.

195

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
10. Evans WC. Pharmacognosy, 14th ed. London, WB Saunders Co., 1996.
11. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
12. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
13. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
14. Samuelsson G. Drugs of natural origin, a textbook of pharmacognosy. Stockholm, Swedish
Pharmaceutical Press, 1992.
15. Dew MJ, Evans BK, Rhodes J. Peppermint oil for the irritable bowel syndrome: a
multicentre trial. British Journal of Clinical Practice, 1984, 38:394, 398.
16. Leicester RJ, Hunt RH. Peppermint oil to reduce colonic spasm during endoscopy.
Lancet, 1982, 2:989.
17. Liu JH et al. Peppermint oil and irritable bowel syndrome. Journal of Gastroenterology, 1997, 32:765–768.
18. Pittler MH, Ernest E. Peppermint oil for irritable bowel syndrome: a critical review
and meta-analysis. American Journal of Gastroenterology, 1998, 93:1131–1135.
19. Rees WDW, Evans BK, Rhodes J. Treating irritable bowel syndrome with peppermint oil. British Medical Journal, 1979, 280:835–836.
20. Wildgrube HJ. Untersuchungen zur Wirksamkeit von Pfefferminzöl auf Beschwerdebild und funktionelle Parameter bei Patienten mit Reizdarm-Syndrom
(Studie). Naturheilpraxis, 1988, 41:591–596.
21. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
22. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 30th ed. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
23. May B et al. Efficacy of a fixed peppermint oil/caraway oil combination in non-ulcer
dyspepsia. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1996, 46:1149–1153.
24. Bromm B et al. Effects of menthol and cold on histamine-induced itch and skin reactions in man. Neuroscience Letters, 1995, 187:157–160.
25. Göbel H et al. Effect of peppermint and eucalyptus oil preparations on neurophysiological and experimental algesimetric headache parameters. Cephalalgia,
1994, 14:228–234.
26. Göbel H, Schmidt G. Effekt von Pfefferminz- und Eukalyptusölpräparationen in
experimentellen Kopfschmerzmodellen. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1995, 16:23–33.
27. Göbel H et al. Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms. Phytomedicine, 1995,
2:93–102.
28. El-Keltawi NEM et al. Antimicrobial activity of some Egyptian aromatic plants.
Herba Polonica, 1980, 26:245–250.
29. Janssen AM et al. Screening for antibacterial activity of some essential oils by the
agar overlay technique. Pharmaceutisch Weekblad (Scientific Edition), 1986, 8:289–292.
30. Ross SA et al. Antimicrobial activity of some Egyptian plants. Fitoterapia, 1980, 51:
201–205.
31. Begum J et al. Studies on essential oils for their antibacterial and antifungal properties. Part I. Preliminary screening of 35 essential oils. Bangladesh Journal of Science and
Industry Research, 1993, 28:25–34.
32. Leifertova I, Lisa M. The antifungal properties of higher plants affecting some
species of the genus Aspergillus. Folia Pharmacie (Prague), 1979, 2:29–54.
33. Reiter M, Brandt W. Relaxant effects on tracheal and ileal smooth muscles of the
guinea-pig. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1985, 35:408–414.
34. Taddei I et al. Spasmolytic activity of peppermint, sage and rosemary essences and
their major constituents. Fitoterapia, 1988, 59:463–468.
35. Gunn JWC. The carminative action of volatile oils. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1920, 16:93–143.

196

Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae
36. Taylor BA, Duthie HL, Luscombe DK. Inhibitory effect of peppermint oil on gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Gut, 1983, 24:A992.
37. Taylor BA, Duthie HL, Luscombe DK. Inhibitory effect of peppermint and menthol
on human isolated coli. Gut, 1984, 25:A1168–A1169.
38. Taylor BA, Duthie HL, Luscombe DK. Calcium antagonist activity of menthol
on smooth gastrointestinal muscle. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 1985,
20:293P–294P.
39. Taylor BA et al. Mechanism by which peppermint oil exerts its relaxant effect
on gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1985, 37
(Suppl. 1):104.
40. Triggle DJ et al. Peppermint oil as a calcium channel antagonist in intestinal
smooth muscle and neuronal preparations. Gastroenterology, 1988, 94:A465.
41. Hills JM, Aaronson PI. The mechanism of action of peppermint oil on gastrointestinal smooth muscle. An analysis using patch clamp electrophysiology and
isolated tissue pharmacology in rabbit and guinea-pigs. Gastroenterology, 1991,
101:55–65.
42. Giachetti D, Taddei E, Taddei I. Pharmacological activity of essential oils on Oddi’s
sphincter. Planta Medica, 1988, 54:389–392.
43. Yamahara J et al. Cholagogic substances in Menthae Herba. Japanese Journal of
Pharmacology, 1985, 39:280.
44. Harries N, James KC, Pugh WK. Antifoaming and carminative actions of volatile
oils. Journal of Clinical Pharmacy, 1978, 2:171–177.
45. Thorup I et al. Short-term toxicity in rats dosed with peppermint oil. Toxicology
Letters, 1983, 19:207–210.
46. Sigmund CJ, McNally EF. The action of a carminative on the lower esophageal
sphincter. Gastroenterology, 1969, 56:13–18.
47. Kingham JGC. Peppermint oil and colonic spasm. Lancet, 1995, 346:986.
48. Sparks MJW et al. Does peppermint oil relieve spasm during barium enema? British
Journal of Radiology, 1995, 68:841–843.
49. Nash P et al. Peppermint oil does not relieve the pain of irritable bowel syndrome.
British Journal of Clinical Practice, 1986, 40:292–293.
50. Rogers J, Tay HH, Misiewicz JJ. Peppermint oil. Lancet, 1988, ii:98–99.
51. Carling L, Svedberg L-E, Hulten S. Short-term treatment of the irritable bowel syndrome: a placebo-controlled trial of peppermint oil against hyoscyamine. Opuscula
Medica, 1989, 34:55–57.
52. Lech AY et al. Behandling af colon irritabile med pebermynteolie. Ugeskrift for Laeger,
1988, 150:2388–2389.
53. Dalvi SS et al. Effect of peppermint oil on gastric emptying in man: a preliminary
study using a radiolabelled solid test meal. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 1991, 35:212–214.
54. Göbel H et al. Oleum menthae piperitae: Wirkmechanismen und klinische
Effektivität bei Kopfschmerz vom Spannungstyp. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N, eds.
Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung. Darmstadt, Steinkopff Verlag,
1995:817–824.
55. Dooms-Goossens A et al. Turpentine-induced hypersensitivity to peppermint oil.
Contact Dermatitis, 1977, 3:304–308.
56. Fisher A. Reactions to menthol. Cutis, 1986, 38:17–18.
57. Saito F, Oka K. Allergic contact dermatitis due to peppermint oil. Skin Research, 1990,
32 (Suppl. 9):161–167.
58. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 3. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1997.
59. Andersen PH, Jensen NJ. Mutagenic investigation of peppermint oil in the Salmonella/mammalian microsome test. Mutation Research, 1984, 138:17–20.

197

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
60. Mintec capsules. Pharmaceutical Journal, 1986, 237:355.
61. Burr ML et al. Food allergic asthma in general practice. Human Nutrition and Applied
Nutrition, 1985, 39A:349–355.
62. Lubow RM et al. Plasma-cell gingivitis: report of a case. Journal of Periodontology, 1984,
55:235–241.
63. Luke E. Addiction to mentholated cigarettes. Lancet, 1962, i:110.
64. Moller NE et al. Allergic and pseudo-allergic reactions caused by penicillins, cocoa
and peppermint additives in penicillin factory workers examined by basophil
histamine release. Acta Pharmacologia Toxicologia, 1984, 55:139–144.
65. Parys BT. Chemical burns resulting from contact with peppermint oil. Burns including Thermal Injuries, 1983, 9:374–375.
66. Williams B. Palindromic rheumatism. Medical Journal of Australia, 1972, 2:390.
67. Hänsel R. Phytopharmaka, 2nd ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1991.

198

Folium Menthae Piperitae

Definition
Folium Menthae Piperitae consists of the dried leaves of Mentha ¥ piperita L.
(Lamiaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Mentha piperita (L.) Huds., M. piperita Stokes, M. balsamea Willd. (1, 4).

Selected vernacular names
Amentha, american mint, balm mint, brandy mint, cabra-caa, curled mint,
doun menta piperita, hierbabuena, hortela pimenta, Katzenkraut, lamb mint,
la menta, lamint, menta piemonte, mentea peperina, mentha pepe, menthe,
menthe anglaise, menthe poivrée, moto yuyo, nána, ni naa, ni’na el fulfully,
pepermin, pepper mint, peppermint, Pfefferminze, Pfefferminzblätter, piperita,
pudeena, pum hub, yerba mota (1, 4, 5).

Geographical distribution
Commercially cultivated in eastern and northern Europe and the United States
of America, and is found in Africa (1, 3, 6, 7).

Description
A perennial herb, 30–90 cm high. Stems square erect or ascending, branched,
the upper portion always quadrangular. Leaves opposite, petiolate, ovateoblong to oblong-lanceolate, serrate, pointed; dark green on the upper surface.
Flowers purplish, occur in thick, terminal, spicoid racemes of verticillasters;
each flower shows a tubular calyx with 5 sharp, hairy teeth, a purplish, irregular, 4-cleft corolla, 4 short stamens, a 4-celled ovary and a projecting style
ending in a bifid stigma. Fruit consists of 4 ellipsoidal nutlets (1, 7, 8).

Plant material of interest: dried leaves
General appearance
Green to greenish-brown. Leaves whole, broken or cut; thin, fragile; whole leaf
3–9 cm long and 1–3 cm wide, often crumpled. Lamina oval or lanceolate;
apex acuminate; margin sharply dentate; base asymmetrical. Venation pinnate,
199

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
prominent on the lower surface, with lateral veins leaving the midrib at an angle
of about 45°. Lower surface slightly pubescent and secretory trichomes visible
under a hand lens as bright yellowish points. Petiole grooved, usually up to
1 mm in diameter and up to 1 cm long (2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic, penetrating; taste: characteristic, aromatic (2).

Microscopic characteristics
Upper epidermis composed of large, clear epidermal cells with sinuous, vertical
walls and possessing few or no stomata, few glandular trichomes present;
palisade parenchyma, comprising a layer of columnar cells rich in chloroplasts;
spongy parenchyma, of 4–6 layers of irregularly shaped chloroplastidcontaining cells and intercellular air-spaces. Lower epidermis of small epidermal
cells with sinuous, vertical walls and numerous diacytic stomata; in the region of
veins and midrib, exhibits non-glandular and glandular trichomes as outgrowths;
non-glandular trichomes uniseriate, papillose, 1–8-celled; glandular trichomes
have 1–2-celled stalk and 1–8-celled glandular head containing the essential oil.
Calcium oxalate crystals absent; pollen grains spheroidal and smooth (1, 4, 7, 8).

Powdered plant material
Brownish-green. Fragments of leaf tissue with cells of epidermis having
sinuous walls, cuticle striated over the veins, diacytic stomata present
predominantly on the lower epidermis; epidermis fragments from near leaf
margin with isodiametric cells showing distinct beading and pitting in anticlinal walls; covering trichomes short, conical, unicellular, bicellular or elongated,
uniseriate multicellular (3–8 cells) with striated cuticle. Glandular trichomes
of 2 types: either with unicellular base with small, rounded, unicellular head
15–25 mm in diameter; or with unicellular base with enlarged, oval multicellular head 55–70 mm in diameter composed of 8 radiating cells; dorsoventral
mesophyll fragments with a single palisade layer and 4–6 layers of spongy
parenchyma; yellowish crystals of menthol under the cuticle of secretory cells.
Calcium oxalate crystals absent (1, 2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, and thin-layer chromatography
(1, 2). Gas chromatography of the steam-distilled essential oil (9).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants
(10).
200

Folium Menthae Piperitae

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 5% stems, the diameter of which must be not more than
1.5 mm; not more than 8% leaves showing brown stains due to Puccinia menthae
(2); not more than 2% other foreign matter (2).

Total ash
Not more than 15% according to the European pharmacopoeia (2); not more than
12% according to the African pharmacopoeia (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1.5% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (2). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (2), and the
WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10) and pesticide residues (11).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (10) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Sulfated ash, water-soluble extractive, alcohol-soluble extractive, and loss on
drying tests to be established in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Whole and cut leaves contain not less than 1.2% and 0.9% (v/w) essential oil,
respectively, determined as described in the European pharmacopoeia (2).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituent of the leaves is the essential oil (0.5–4%), which
contains menthol (30–55%) and menthone (14–32%). Menthol occurs mostly
in the free alcohol form, with small quantities as the acetate (3–5%) and
valerate esters. Other monoterpenes present include isomenthone (2–10%),
1,8-cineole (6–14%), a-pinene (1.0–1.5%), b-pinene (1–2%), limonene (1–
5%), neomenthol (2.5–3.5%) and menthofuran (1–9%) (2, 4, 6, 12, 13).
201

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
The structures of the major monoterpenes, menthol and menthone, are presented below.
H3C

H

OH

H

CH3
H

menthol

H3C

CH3

O

H

CH3
H

menthone

CH3

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Symptomatic treatment of dyspepsia, flatulence and intestinal colic (1, 3, 14,
15).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
As an emmenagogue, vermifuge, lactation enhancer and sedative. Also used to
treat bronchitis, bacillary dysentery, diabetes, diarrhoea, dysmenorrhoea, fevers,
hypertension, jaundice, nausea, pain, and respiratory and urinary tract infections
(5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial activity
Extracts of Folium Menthae Piperitae have antibacterial and antiviral activity in
vitro. Addition of ground leaves to the agar medium inhibited the growth of
Salmonella typhimurium, Staphylococcus aureus and Vibrio parahaemolyticus at concentrations of 0.1–2.0% (w/v) (16). Aqueous and ethanol extracts of the leaves
reduced the number of plaques of the rinderpest virus at concentrations of
4–8 mg/ml (17). Aqueous extracts of the leaves demonstrated activity against
the following viruses in egg and cell culture: Newcastle disease, herpes simplex,
vaccinia, Semliki Forest and West Nile (18).
Smooth muscle contraction
A 31% ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited both acetylcholine- and
histamine-induced smooth muscle contractions in guinea-pig ileum in vitro at
a concentration of 10 ml/l (19, 20). The results were similar to those obtained
with 0.13 mg atropine (19). An aqueous flavonoid fraction isolated from a leaf
202

Folium Menthae Piperitae
extract inhibited barium chloride-induced muscle contractions of guinea-pig
ileum in vitro at a concentration corresponding to 0.5 g leaves/ml (21).
Choleretic activity
Injection of a leaf infusion (0.5 ml) or a flavonoid fraction (equivalent to 3.3 g
leaves/kg body weight) increased the amount of bile acids in cannulated rats
and dogs (dose 0.4 mg/kg body weight) (21, 22). A mixture of flavonoids, isolated from the leaves, had choleretic activity in dogs (2 mg/kg body weight)
(23). Flavomentin, a flavonoid isolated from the leaves, stimulated bile secretion and the synthesis of bile acids in dogs (2 mg/kg body weight) (24). Intragastric administration of a 30% ethanol extract of the leaves to rats (1 ml/kg
body weight) increased bile flow by 43%. The extract did not induce sedation
in mice at doses up to 10 ml/kg body weight (20).
Anti-oedema activity
Topical application of a methanol leaf extract to mice (2.0 mg/ear) inhibited ear
oedema induced by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (25).
Analgesic activity
Intragastric administration of a 30% ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited
phenylbenzoquinone-induced writhing in mice (ED50 2.1 ml/kg body weight)
(20).
Toxicology
Intragastric administration of a leaf extract (50 g leaves infused with 500 ml hot
water for 10 minutes, then spray-dried) to 12 mice (4 g/kg body weight as a
single dose) did not result in central nervous system depression, toxic effects
or mortality (26).

Clinical pharmacology
None.

Contraindications
No information available.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
General
Patients with gallstones should not use Folium Menthae Piperitae unless under
medical supervision (15).
203

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Other precautions
No information available on precautions concerning drug interactions; drug and
laboratory test interactions; carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy; nursing mothers; or
paediatric use. Therefore, Folium Menthae Piperitae should not be administered
during pregnancy or lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
No information available.

Dosage forms
Dried leaves (2, 3). Tincture and infusions (6). Store in a well-closed container,
protected from light (2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 1–3 g crude drug three times daily (14, 27). Infusion: pour 150 ml
hot water over 1.5–3.0 g (one tablespoon) dried leaves, steep for 10 minutes,
strain and drink three times daily between meals (6, 15, 28). Tincture: 2–3 ml
(1 : 5, 45% ethanol) three times daily (14).

References
1. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
2. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
3. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and
Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
7. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
8. Evans WC. Pharmacognosy, 14th ed. London, WB Saunders Co., 1996.
9. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
10. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
11. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
12. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
13. Samuelsson G. Drugs of natural origin, a textbook of pharmacognosy. Stockholm,
Swedish Pharmaceutical Press, 1992.

204

Folium Menthae Piperitae
14. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Bournemouth, British Herbal
Medicine Association, 1992.
15. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
16. Aktug SE, Karapinar M. Sensitivity of some common food-poisoning bacteria
to thyme, mint and bay leaves. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 1986,
3:349–354.
17. Alwan AH et al. Antiviral activity of some Iraqi indigenous plants. International
Journal of Crude Drug Research, 1988, 2:107–111.
18. Herrmann EC Jr, Kucera LS. Antiviral substances in plants of the mint family
(Labiatae). III. Peppermint (Mentha piperita) and other mint plants. Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 1967:874–878.
19. Forster HB et al. Antispasmodic effects of some medicinal plants. Planta Medica,
1980, 40:309–319.
20. Leslie GB. A pharmacometric evaluation of nine Bio-Strath herbal remedies. Medita,
1978, 8:3–19.
21. Lallement-Guilbert N, Bézanger-Beauquesne L. Recherches sur les flavonoides
quelques Labiees médicinales (romarin, menthe poivrée, suage officinale). Plantes
médicinales et Phytothérapie, 1970, 4:92–107.
22. Steinmetzer K. Experimentelle Untersuchungen über Cholagoga. Wiener Klinische
Wochenschrift, 1926, 39:1418–1422, 1455–1457.
23. Pasechnik IK. Study of choleretic properties specific to flavonoids from Mentha
piperita leaves. Farmakologiia Toksikologiia, 1966, 21:735–737.
24. Pasechnik IK, Gella EV. Choleretic preparation from peppermint. Farmatsevtychnyi
Zhurnal (Kiev), 1966, 21:49–53.
25. Yasukawa K et al. Inhibitory effect of edible plant extracts on 12-Otetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced ear edema in mice. Phytotherapy Research,
1993, 7:185–189.
26. Della Loggia R et al. Evaluation of some pharmacological activities of a peppermint
extract. Fitoterapia, 1990, 61:215–221.
27. Wichtl M. Pfefferminzblätter. In: Wichtl M, ed. Teedrogen, 2nd ed. Stuttgart,
Wissenschaftliche Verlägsgesellschaft, 1989:372–374.
28. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 3. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1997.

205

Folium Ocimi Sancti

Definition
Folium Ocimi Sancti consists of the fresh or dried leaves of Ocimum sanctum L.
(Lamiaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Moschosma tenuiflorum (L.) Heynhold, Ocimum album Blanco, O. anisodorum
Muell., O. brachiatum Hasskarl, O. flexuosum Blanco, O. frutescens Burm., O.
gratissimum Lour., O. inodorum Burm., O. monachorum L., O. nelsonii Zipp ex
Span., O. tenuiflorum L., O. virgatum Blanco (4).

Selected vernacular names
Badrooj, basilic des moines, bazsalikom levél, daun lampes, garden balsam,
green tulsi, holy basil, huong nhu t¡ia, jagu lu myah, kamimebouki, kaphrao,
kaprao, kemangi, kemangi laki, kra phrao, lampas, monk’s basil, peihan,
rayhhan, reihan, sacred basil, saling-kugon, saling-kugon ma, selaseh puteh,
solasi, sulasi, sursa, tamole, thulasi, tjlsi, tulashi, tulasi, tulsi (1, 4–9).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to India and parts of north and eastern Africa, Hainan Island and
Taiwan, China. It is cultivated in south-east Asia (6, 8, 10).

Description
A herb or shrub, up to 1 m high, often much branched. Stem square, lower parts
sub-serrate, higher parts slightly furrowed and more densely pubescent or subglabrous. Leaves simple, opposite, oblong, ovate or oval-oblong, 2.7–7.5 cm
long, 1–3 cm wide, with acute top, cuneate, obtuse to rounded base, margin
entire, undulate or serrate, both surfaces thinly pubescent and dotted; petiole
0.2–3.0 cm long. Calyx 0.2–0.4 cm long, with or without long or short hairs,
ciliate, densely glandulose; upper lip 2.0–3.5 mm long, oval short-acuminate;
lower lip 1.0–2.5 mm long, dentate, teeth linear-acuminate from an equal- or
unequal-sided triangular to ovate base, 2 anterior teeth equalling or slightly
surpassing the upper lip; fruiting calyx not completely closed by teeth. Upper
part of the corolla villous and glandulose in the upper part; lobes of upper lip
206

Folium Ocimi Sancti
rounded, lobes of lower lip obtuse to rounded. Nutlets obovoid, dark brown
or black, 1–2 mm long; pericarp swells into a slimy mass when moistened (6,
8, 11, 12).

Plant material of interest: fresh or dried leaves
General appearance
Leaves green to greenish-brown, 2.5–7.5 cm long, 1–3 cm wide, oblong, ovate
or oval-oblong, with acute top, cuneate, obtuse to rounded base, pinnate veins,
serrate or entire and undulate margin; thin but fleshy, both surfaces thinly
pubescent; petiole cylindrical, 1–2 cm long, thinly pubescent (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic, aromatic; taste: slightly pungent (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section of the leaf through its midrib: upper epidermis consists of a
layer of small, quadrangular transparent cells with thin walls and thin smooth
cuticle. On tangential view, these cells are polygonal with straight or wavy
walls. Lower epidermis consists of a layer of small, quadrangular transparent
cells with thin walls and thin smooth cuticle. Trichomes bent, consisting of 2–6
cells; glandular trichomes short, Lamiaceae type, consisting of 1 stalk cell and
2–4 cells with rounded heads. Palisade parenchyma consists of layer of long
cylindrical cells containing chlorophyll; spongy parenchyma consists of polygonal cells with thin, straight or slightly wavy side walls. Vascular bundles collateral type with collenchyma cells. Stomata diacytic, on upper and lower
epidermis (1).

Powdered plant material
Upper epidermis with diacytic stomata, glandular trichomes and palisade cells;
lower epidermis with diacytic stomata and underlying spongy cells; 2- and 4celled glandular trichomes; uniseriate, multicellular trichomes with collapsed
cells; lignified fibres; spiral vessels; pollen grains rare; parenchyma and collenchyma from petioles (2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1), and thin-layer chromatography
(2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (13).
207

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Total ash
Not more than 13% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1% (1).

Sulfated ash
Not more than 20% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 5% (1).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 5.0% (2).

Loss on drying
Not more than 14% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (14). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (14), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13) and
pesticide residues (15).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (13) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical and foreign organic matter tests to be established in accordance with
national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.5% essential oil (3). Gas chromatography and gas
chromatography–mass spectroscopy methods are available for qualitative and
quantitative determination of volatile constituents (16).
208

Folium Ocimi Sancti

Major chemical constituents
The main components are tannins (4.6%) and essential oil (up to 2%) (1). The
amounts of the primary constituents of the essential oil vary according to the
geographical distribution and variety of the source plant material: eugenol (up
to 62%), methyleugenol (up to 86%), and a- and b-caryophyllene (up to 42%).
Also present are methylchavicol, linalool and 1,8-cineole (4, 16–19). The structures of the major constituents are presented below.
CH3

CH3

OR

H
CH3

H 2C
eugenol
methyleugenol

OCH3

H3C

R=H
R = CH3

CH3
a-caryophyllene

H
H3C

CH2
CH3

b-caryophyllene

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None. Although there are some preliminary clinical data supporting the use of
Folium Ocimi Sancti for the treatment of diabetes, further trials are needed to
substantiate the data.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Treatment of arthritis, asthma, bronchitis, common cold, diabetes, fever,
influenza, peptic ulcer and rheumatism (1, 8, 20).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of earache, epilepsy, heart disease, malaria, sinusitis, snake bites,
stomach ache and vomiting. Also as an anthelminthic, to stimulate lactation,
to prevent hair loss, and as a tonic (7).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Analgesic activity
Intraperitoneal or intragastric administration of the fixed oil to mice (3 ml/kg
body weight) significantly inhibited writhing induced by acetic acid (P < 0.01)
(21). Intragastric administration of an aqueous suspension or a methanol extract
of the leaves to mice (100 mg/kg body weight) showed analgesic activity in the
hot-plate test (22).
209

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Antispasmodic activity
A 50% ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited histamine-induced bronchospasms and pre-convulsive dyspnoea in guinea-pigs when administered
by gastric lavage (200 mg/kg body weight) (23, 24). Intragastric administration
of the leaf essential oil or fixed oil to guinea-pigs (0.5 ml/kg body weight)
inhibited bronchospasms induced by both histamine and acetylcholine, and
pre-convulsive dyspnoea (23–25).
A hydroalcoholic extract of the leaves inhibited muscle spasms induced by
histamine in guinea-pig ileum, and muscle spasms induced by acetylcholine,
barium and histamine in guinea-pig small intestine in vitro (26). However, an
aqueous extract showed no activity in either test system (27). In another study,
aqueous extracts of the leaves inhibited muscle spasms induced by acetylcholine, histamine and carbachol in rabbit intestine in vitro (28).
Antimicrobial activity
An ether or 95% ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited the growth in vitro of
Staphylococcus aureus and S. citreus (29, 30) and of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (29,
31). A hot aqueous extract of the leaves inhibited the growth in vitro of Trichophyton mentagrophytes (32), and the growth of Aspergillus fumigatus and A. niger
was inhibited in vitro when grown on agar plates containing the powdered
leaves (33).
Anti-inflammatory activity
Intragastric administration of a hydroalcoholic extract of the leaves or the
essential oil to rats and guinea-pigs (10 ml/kg body weight) inhibited footpad
oedema induced by histamine, serotonin and carrageenan (23, 24). Intragastric
administration of the fixed oil and linolenic acid extracted from the leaf to rats
inhibited footpad oedema induced by prostaglandin E2, leukotriene, carrageenan and arachidonic acid (34). Intragastric administration of an aqueous
leaf extract to rats (100 mg/kg body weight) inhibited footpad oedema induced
by croton oil and carrageenan (22). Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous
leaf extract to rats (100 mg/kg body weight) also inhibited carrageenan-induced
footpad oedema (35). A hydroalcoholic extract of the leaves inhibited the activity of prostaglandin synthetase by 88% in vitro at a concentration of 750 mg/ml
(36). An aqueous leaf extract exhibited anticholinergic and antihistamine activity in guinea-pig ileum and small intestine in vitro (0.15 mg) (27).
Antipyretic activity
Intragastric administration of a methanol leaf extract to rats (250 mg/kg body
weight) suppressed fever induced by typhoid vaccine (35). However, intragastric administration of a hydroalcoholic extract of the leaves to rabbits (10 mg)
did not suppress fever induced by yeast (37).
210

Folium Ocimi Sancti
Effect on sleeping time
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous or 70% ethanol extract (30–
40 mg/kg body weight) of the leaves to mice potentiated sleeping time induced
by hexobarbital and pentobarbital (28, 38).
Immunostimulatory activity
Intragastric administration of an aqueous or methanol extract of the leaves
to rats (100–500 mg/kg body weight) increased antibody titre in both sheep
erythrocyte and Widal agglutination tests, thus demonstrating stimulation of
the humoral immune response. The cellular immune response was also stimulated, as an increase in lymphocytosis and E-rosette formation was also seen
(39). Intragastric administration of a leaf essential oil to rats (100 mg/kg body
weight) enhanced the titres of both anti-sheep red blood cell and IgE antibodies (40).
Endocrinological effects
The effects of a leaf extract on changes in serum triiodothyronine, thyroxine
and cholesterol concentrations have been investigated in mice. After 15 days
of treatment (0.5 g/kg body weight, by gastric lavage), significant decreases
were observed in serum thyroxine concentration, hepatic lipid peroxidation
and hepatic glucose-6-phosphate activities. No marked change in serum triiodothyronine levels was noted. The activities of superoxide dismutase and
superoxide catalase were increased (41).
Antiulcer activity
Intragastric administration of an ethanol extract of the leaves to rats reduced
the concentration of plasma corticosterone, which had risen following 30
minutes of noise (100 dB), to normal levels (42). An organic solvent extract of
the leaves had significant antioxidant activity in a variety of in vitro systems
(43). Intragastric administration of a 70% ethanol extract of the leaves to rats
(100 mg/kg body weight) prevented ulcers induced by acetylsalicylic acid and
stress (44). Administration of the dried leaves to rats similarly prevented ulcers
induced by cold and acetylsalicylic acid (45). However, intragastric administration of a methanol extract of dried leaves to mice (2 g/kg body weight) did not
prevent stress-induced ulcers (46).
Hypoglycaemic activity
Intragastric administration of a 50% ethanol extract of the leaves (250 mg/kg
body weight) to albino rats with experimentally induced hyperglycaemia
reduced blood glucose levels by 30% (26, 47). Intragastric administration
of the leaves (50–400 mg/kg body weight) to rats with diabetes induced by
streptozocin resulted in a reduction in blood glucose levels measured after
fasting (48).
211

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Toxicity
Intragastric administration of eugenol (400–600 mg/kg body weight) has been
reported to produce liver damage in mice, whose livers were experimentally
depleted of glutathione (49). It was also cytotoxic in isolated rat hepatocytes
(50). However, no generalized toxicity was reported in mice after a 50% ethanol
extract of the leaves was injected either intraperitoneally (1 g/kg body weight)
(26) or intradermally (10 g/kg body weight) (51).

Clinical pharmacology
Asthma
In a study without controls, oral administration of an aqueous extract of dried
Folium Ocimi Sancti to 20 patients with asthma increased lung vital capacity
and relieved laboured breathing (52).
Glucose and cholesterol levels
A randomized, placebo-controlled, single-blind, crossover study assessed the
effects of the dried leaves on the levels of blood glucose and serum cholesterol
in 40 non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Patients received orally 2.5 g
leaves daily for 4 weeks. Blood glucose levels, measured after fasting and eating,
decreased by 17.6% and 7.3% respectively. Mean total cholesterol levels also
decreased slightly (by 6.5%) during the treatment period (20). No adverse
effects were observed.

Contraindications
There are conflicting reports on the embryotoxicity of Folium Ocimi Sancti (53,
54). The use of Folium Ocimi Sancti is therefore contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Drug interactions
One study has shown that eugenol may be hepatotoxic in mice with glutathione-depleted livers (49). Therefore, Folium Ocimi Sancti should be used
with caution in patients taking drugs such as paracetamol (acetaminophen) that
deplete glutathione.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A hot aqueous extract of fresh Folium Ocimi Sancti was not mutagenic in
Bacillus subtilis H-17 (rec+) and M-45(rec-) at a concentration of 0.5 ml/disc (55).
212

Folium Ocimi Sancti
Intragastric administration of the leaves prevented implantation of the embryo
in various animal models (54, 56). Intragastric administration of the leaves
(10% of feed) to male mice inhibited spermatogenesis (57, 58).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
There are conflicting reports on the embryotoxicity of Folium Ocimi Sancti. In
one study, a benzene leaf extract was neither teratogenic nor embryotoxic
when administered intragastrically to rats (200 mg/kg body weight) (53).
However, another study demonstrated that aqueous or benzene extracts of the
leaves were embryotoxic when administered intragastrically to rats (100–
200 mg/kg body weight) (54). (See also Contraindications.)

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
and laboratory test interactions or paediatric use. Therefore, Folium Ocimi
Sancti should not be administered to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
No adverse reactions have been reported in clinical trials (20, 52).

Dosage forms
Crude drug and preparations thereof (1).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 6–12 g crude drug as a decoction (8).

References
1. Materia medika Indonesia, Jilid VI. Jakarta, Departemen Kesehatan, Republik
Indonesia, 1995.
2. Thai herbal pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1. Bangkok, Prachachon Company, 1995.
3. Vietnamese pharmacopoeia, 1st ed. Hanoi, Nha Xuat Ban Y Hoc, 1983.
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Cambie RC, Ash J. Fijian medicinal plants. Australia, Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation, 1994.

213

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
6. Manual for cultivation, production and utilization of herbal medicines in primary health care.
Nonthaburi, Department of Medical Science, Ministry of Health, 1990.
7. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, January 28, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
8. Medicinal plants in Viet Nam. Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific,
1990 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series, No. 3).
9. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
10. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1993.
11. Backer CA, Backhuisen van den Brink RC, eds. Flora of Java. Vol. 2. Noordhof,
NVP, 1965.
12. Medicinal plants in the South Pacific. Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western
Pacific, 1990 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series, No. 19).
13. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
14. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
15. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
16. Sukari MA, Takahashi S. Biological activity of some Malaysian plant extracts.
Pertaniks, 1988, 11:249–253.
17. Brophy J, Jogia MK. Essential oils from two varieties of Fijian Ocimum sanctum
(Tulsi). Fiji Agricultural Journal, 1984, 46:21–26.
18. Maheshwari ML et al. Essential oil of sacred basil (Ocimum sanctum). Indian Perfumer,
1987, 31:137–145.
19. Lal RN, Sen TK, Nigam MC. Gas chromatography of the essential oil of Ocimum
sanctum L. Parfümerie und Kosmetiks, 1978, 59:230–231.
20. Agrawal P, Rai V, Singh RB. Randomized, placebo-controlled, single-blind trial of
holy basil leaves in patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 1996, 34:406–409.
21. Singh S, Majumdar DK, Analgesic activity of Ocimum sanctum and its possible
mechanism of action. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1995, 33:188–192.
22. Godhwani S et al. Ocimum sanctum: an experimental study evaluating its antiinflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic activity in animals. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1987, 21:153–163.
23. Singh S, Agrawal SS. Anti-asthmatic and anti-inflammatory activity of Ocimum
sanctum L. Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine, 1991, 10:23–28.
24. Singh S, Agrawal SS. Anti-asthmatic and anti-inflammatory activity of Ocimum
sanctum. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1991, 29:306–310.
25. Singh S, Majumdar DK, Yadav MR. Chemical and pharmacological studies on
fixed oil of Ocimum sanctum. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1996, 34:1212–
1215.
26. Dhar ML et al. Screening of Indian plants for biological activity: Part 1. Indian Journal
of Experimental Biology, 1968, 6:232–247.
27. Ketusinh O et al. Smooth muscle actions of some Thai herbal carminatives. Thai
Journal of Pharmacology, 1984, 6:11–19.
28. Singh TJ et al. Preliminary pharmacological investigations of Ocimum sanctum, Linn.
Indian Journal of Pharmacy, 1970, 32:92–94.
29. Gupta KC, Viswanathan R. A short note on antitubercular substance from Ocimum
sanctum. Antibiotics and Chemotherapy, 1955, 5:22–23.
30. Phadke SA, Kulkarni SD. Screening of in vitro antibacterial activity of Terminalia
chebula, Eclipta alba and Ocimum sanctum. Indian Journal of Medical Science, 1989, 45:
113–117.

214

Folium Ocimi Sancti
31. Reddi GS et al. Chemotherapy of tuberculosis—antitubercular activity of Ocimum
sanctum leaf extract. Fitoterapia, 1986, 57:114–116.
32. Rai MK, Upadhyay S. Screening of medicinal plants of Chindwara district against
Trichophyton mentagrophytes: a causal organism of Tinea pedis. Hindustan Antibiotic
Bulletin, 1988, 30:33–36.
33. Saksena N, Tripathi HHS. Plant volatiles in relation to fungistasis. Fitoterapia, 1985,
56:243–244.
34. Singh S, Majumdar DK. Evaluation of antiinflammatory activity of fatty acids
of Ocimum sanctum fixed oil. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1997, 35:380–
383.
35. Chattopadhyay RR et al. A comparative evaluation of some anti-inflammatory
agents of plant origin. Fitoterapia, 1994, 65:146–148.
36. Tseng CF et al. Inhibition of in vitro prostaglandin and leukotriene biosynthesis by
cinnamoyl-b-phenethylamine and N-acyldopamine derivatives. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1992, 40:396–400.
37. Mokkhasmit M et al. Pharmacological evaluation of Thai medicinal plants. Journal
of the Medical Association of Thailand, 1971, 54:490–503.
38. Sakina MR et al. Preliminary psychopharmacological evaluation of Ocimum sanctum
leaf extract. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1990, 28:143–150.
39. Godhwani S et al. Ocimum sanctum: a preliminary study evaluating its immunoregulatory profile in albino rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1988, 65:301–302.
40. Mediratta PK et al. Effect of Ocimum sanctum Linn. on humoral immune responses.
Indian Journal of Medical Research, 1988, 4:384–386.
41. Panda S, Kar A. Ocimum sanctum leaf extract in the regulation of thyroid function in
the male mouse. Pharmacology Research, 1998, 38:107–110.
42. Sembulingam K et al. Effect of Ocimum sanctum Linn. on noise-induced changes in
plasma corticosterone levels. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 1997, 41:
139–143.
43. Maulik G et al. Evaluation of antioxidant effectiveness of a few herbal plants. Free
Radical Research, 1997, 27:221–228.
44. Bhargava KP, Singh N. Anti-stress activity of Ocimum sanctum Linn. Indian Journal
of Medical Research, 1981, 73:443–451.
45. Singh N et al. Indian plants as anti-stress agents. In: Proceedings of the International
Congress of Natural Products. Chapel Hill, NC, 1988, Abstract 202.
46. Yamazaki M et al. Studies on pharmacologically active principles from Indonesian
crude drugs. I. Principle prolonging pentobarbital-induced sleeping time from
Curcuma xanthorrhiza RoxB. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1988, 36:2070–
2074.
47. Giri JP et al. Effect of Tulsi (Ocimum sanctum) on diabetes mellitus. Indian Journal of
Nutrition and Dietetics, 1987, 24:337–341.
48. Chattopadhyay RR. Hypoglycemic effect of Ocimum sanctum leaf extract in normal
and streptozocin-diabetic rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1993, 31:
891–893.
49. Mizutani T et al. Hepatotoxicity of eugenol and related compounds in mice depleted
of glutathione: structural requirements for toxic potency. Research Communications in
Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology, 1991, 73:87–95.
50. Thompson DC et al. Metabolism and cytotoxicity of eugenol in isolated rat hepatocytes. Chemico–biological Interactions, 1991, 77:137–147.
51. Mokkhasmit M et al. Toxicity study of some Thai medicinal plants. Bulletin of the
Department of Medical Sciences of Thailand, 1971, 12:36–65.
52. Sharma G. Antiasthmatic effect of Ocimum sanctum. Sacitra Ayurveda, 1983, 35:
665–668.
53. Batta SK, Santhakumari G. The antifertility effect of Ocimum sanctum and Hibiscus
rosa sinensis. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 1970, 59:777–781.

215

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
54. Vohora SB et al. Antifertility screening of plants. Part III. Effect of six indigenous
plants on early pregnancy in albino rats. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 1969, 57:
893–899.
55. Ungsurungsie M et al. Mutagenicity screening of popular Thai spices. Food and Cosmetic Toxicology, 1982, 20:527–530.
56. Kamboj VP. A review of Indian medicinal plants with interceptive activity. Indian
Journal of Medical Research, 1988, 81:336–355.
57. Kashnathan S et al. Antifertility effects of Ocimum sanctum L. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1972, 10:23–25.
58. Seth SD et al. Antispermatogenic effect of Ocimum sanctum. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1981, 19:975–976.

216

Oleum Oenotherae Biennis

Definition
Oleum Oenotherae Biennis is the fixed oil obtained from the seeds of Oenothera
biennis L. (Onagraceae).

Synonyms
Oenothera communis Léveillé, Oenothera graveolens Gilib., Onagra biennis Scop.,
Onagra vulgaris Spach. (1).

Selected vernacular names
Enotera, evening primrose, hhashyshat el hhimar, king’s cureall, la belle
de nuit, ligetszépeolaj, mematsuyoigusa, Nachtkerzenöl, onagre, raghan-e gole
magrebi, teunisbloem (1–7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to Europe and is naturalized in North America (7, 8).

Description
A biennial or occasionally an annual, up to 1.25 m high. Thick yellowish conical
root produces compressed rosettes of obtuse basal leaves, from which arise
much-branched reddish, rough stems; stems bear alternate, lanceolate to ovate,
entire, 4 cm long, short petioled leaves. Flowers very fragrant, 3–5 cm in diameter, yellow, erect on spikes, 4-petalled; open in the evening and wilt after 1
night. Seed pods contain many small reddish-brown seeds. Plant hybridizes
easily (2, 9).

Plant material of interest: fixed oil obtained from
the seeds
General appearance
A light-amber liquid.

Organoleptic properties
Odourless; taste: oily.
217

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

General identity tests
Standard methods for analysis of fatty acids (1, 9).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (10).

Chemical
Refractive index: 1.476–1.480 (5).
Specific gravity: 0.920–0.930 (5).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (11). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (11), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10) and
pesticide residues (12).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (10) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Foreign organic matter acid values to be established in accordance with national
requirements.

Chemical assays
Concentration limits of linoleic acid (cis-linoleic acid) and g-linolenic acid (cis-glinolenic acid) need to be established. However, based on literature data, values
of not less than 60% and 7%, respectively, may be considered. A gas chromatography method is available for quantitative analysis (13).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are linoleic acid (cis-linoleic acid) (65–80%), g-linolenic
acid (cis-g-linolenic acid) (8–14%), oleic acid (6–11%), palmitic acid (7–10%)
and stearic acid (1.5–3.5%). Other constituents include sterols and triterpene
alcohols (1, 3, 6, 14, 15). The structures of linoleic acid and g-linolenic acid are
presented below.
218

Oleum Oenotherae Biennis
linoleic acid

H3C

g-linolenic acid H3C

CO2H
CO2H

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Internally for symptomatic treatment of atopic eczema (2, 16–21), diabetic
neuropathy (22, 23), and mastalgia (24–26). Clinical evidence for its use in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (27–30) is conflicting, as are the results of
trials in women with premenstrual syndrome (31–35). Further well-designed
clinical trials are needed to clarify these data. The results from clinical trials do
not support the use of Oleum Oenotherae Biennis for the treatment of climacteric symptoms or psoriasis (36, 37).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Topical use for the treatment of minor bruises and wounds (2).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Taken internally for the treatment of asthma, coughs, gastrointestinal disorders,
pain and whooping cough (2, 9, 38).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-allergic activity
Oleum Oenotherae Biennis was added to the diet (1 g/kg body weight, for 5
days) of guinea-pigs sensitized to ovalbumin prior to sequential allergen inhalation challenges. Treatment with the fixed oil reduced the severity of bronchial
reactions following allergen challenge; the reactions were less severe in the
animals challenged 80 minutes after treatment (86% reduction) than in those
challenged after 10 minutes (33% reduction) (39).
Effects on cholesterol and triglyceride levels
Administration of the fixed oil to rabbits (15% of a high-cholesterol diet) for 6
weeks reduced total serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels, and increased
high-density lipoprotein levels (40). A decrease in cholesterol and triglyceride
levels in plasma and liver was observed in rats fed a diet containing the fixed
oil (10% of a high-cholesterol diet) for 5 weeks (41). The fixed oil also increased
the levels of high-density lipoprotein, IgG and leukocytes in the serum of mice
fed a regular diet containing 10% fixed oil for 6 weeks (42). Levels of total serum
219

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
cholesterol and very-low-density lipoprotein were consistently lower in rats fed
a high-cholesterol diet supplemented with 10% fixed oil for 13 weeks, after
having been fed a regular diet for 8 weeks (since birth) (43).
Inhibition of platelet aggregation
Administration of the fixed oil to rats (5 ml/kg body weight) inhibited
adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation ex vivo (14). However, in
another study no effect on adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation
ex vivo was observed in rats fed a diet containing the fixed oil (10% of diet)
(41). Administration of the fixed oil to rabbits (15% of a high-cholesterol diet)
reduced platelet hyperaggregation ex vivo (40).
Antihypertensive activity
Rats fed a diet containing 11% fixed oil for 7 weeks showed a decrease in the
spontaneous development of hypertension (41, 44). However, the vascular
response to the vasoconstrictor hormones norepinephrine, angiotensin II or the
calcium channel blocker verapamil remained unchanged (44). In another study,
however, intragastric administration of the fixed oil to rats (1 ml daily for 3
months) significantly reduced the vascular response to renin and angiotensin II
(P < 0.05), and significantly increased the formation of vascular prostacyclinlike activity (P < 0.05), compared with control rats which received olive oil (14).
Intragastric administration of the fixed oil to rats enhanced the hypotensive
effects of dihydralazine, clonidine and captopril (45).
Administration of the fixed oil (147 nmol/hour via an osmotic pump for 8
weeks) to male rats fed a fat-free diet attenuated the cardiovascular responses
(increased heart rate and blood pressure) to chronic isolation stress (46). Administration of g-linolenic acid (0.4 mg/kg body weight/hour, via an osmotic pump
for 8 weeks) also attenuated the cardiovascular responses to chronic isolation
stress in male rats genetically predisposed to hypertension (47). Administration
of the fixed oil to rats (9% of diet) decreased cardiac arrhythmias induced by
ischaemia (48).
Antiulcer activity
Intragastric administration of the fixed oil to rats (10 ml/kg body weight) inhibited gastric mucosal damage resulting from ulcers induced by pylorus ligation,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and hypothermic restraint. The same
dose of the fixed oil also protected gastric mucosa from damage by necrotizing agents (0.6 mol/l hydrochloric acid, 0.2 mol/l sodium hydroxide and 80%
ethanol) (49).
Antiarthritic activity
Subcutaneous administration of the fixed oil to rats (4 mg/kg body weight)
suppressed adjuvant-induced arthritis when administered 1–15 days after adjuvant injection (50). Intragastric administration of the fixed oil (0.2 ml/kg body
220

Oleum Oenotherae Biennis
weight) stimulated phagocytosis, T-lymphocyte production and natural killer
cell activity in cyclophosphamide-induced immune suppression in mice (51).
Daily topical application of the fixed oil (10%) to the skin of pigs for 6 weeks
enhanced cell proliferation (52).
Nerve function
Administration of the fixed oil (10% of diet) to rats with streptozocin-induced
diabetes corrected a decrease in nerve conduction velocity, but did not reduce
the prolonged hypoxic time to conduction failure after 1 month of treatment.
Capillary density of the endoneurium also increased. Treatment of the animals
with flurbiprofen, a cyclooxygenase inhibitor, reduced the effect of the fixed
oil (53). Intragastric administration of the fixed oil (1 g/kg body weight) for
6 weeks to rats with streptozocin-induced diabetes improved conduction velocity in the sciatic motor nerve and increased sciatic endoneural blood
flow (54). In another study, administration of the fixed oil (5% of diet) to rats
with streptozocin-induced diabetes prevented the decrease in nerve conduction
velocity without affecting the levels of nerve sorbitol, fructose and myoinositol, or the decrease in axonal transport of substance P (55).
Anti-embryotoxic activity
Intragastric administration of the fixed oil (0.6 ml daily) to pregnant rats on
days 4–8 of gestation significantly reduced the embryotoxic effects of ethanol
(56).

Clinical pharmacology
Atopic eczema
A meta-analysis of nine placebo-controlled clinical trials (four parallel studies
and five with crossover design) of Oleum Oenotherae Biennis in the symptomatic treatment of 311 patients with atopic eczema concluded that the fixed
oil was more effective than placebo (20). However, two double-blind, placebocontrolled studies that were not included in the meta-analysis, one crossover
trial of 123 patients (2–4 g for children, 6–8 g for adults, daily for 4 weeks) (57),
and one parallel trial of 102 patients (dosage not stated) (58), reported negative
results. In another double-blind, placebo-controlled study, the efficacy of the
fixed oil in the treatment of 39 patients with chronic dermatitis of the hands
was assessed. Patients received 6 g fixed oil or placebo daily for 16 weeks.
Improvements were observed in both groups, but there was no significant difference between the two groups (59). A randomized double-blind, placebocontrolled crossover trial of 99 patients assessed the efficacy of oral administration of the fixed oil for symptomatic treatment of atopic eczema. Patients
treated with 2–4 g fixed oil daily for 12 weeks showed a 30–45% improvement
in the overall severity of the eczema, including a significant decrease in itching
and scaling (P < 0.002), as compared with those that received the placebo (21).
Similar results were reported in a multicentre study (60). In a double-blind,
221

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
parallel trial, oral administration of 430 mg oil daily to 37 patients with psoriasis resulted in no significant improvement in symptoms (37).
A double-blind, placebo-controlled study tested two doses of the fixed oil in
the treatment of 51 children with atopic dermatitis. Patients were treated for 8
weeks with either a placebo, the fixed oil, or a combination of 50% placebo and
50% fixed oil (daily dose of 0.5 g/kg body weight, for all treatments). A significant improvement in the overall severity of the clinical symptoms was observed
in patients treated with the fixed oil alone (P = 0.046). This treatment also
increased the concentration of omega-6 fatty acids in the erythrocyte cell membranes (17). In a study without controls, oral administration of the fixed oil (3 g)
to 12 children daily for 4–20 weeks improved the symptoms of atopic eczema
(2, 16, 18). In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel trial, 58 children with
atopic dermatitis were treated daily with either placebo or the fixed oil (2–4 g)
for 16 weeks. Plasma concentrations of essential fatty acids increased in the
group treated with the fixed oil. Symptomatic improvements occurred in both
groups, but there was no significant difference between the two treatments (61).
The major difficulty with this study was the use of a placebo containing sunflower oil, which has a similar spectrum of essential fatty acids to the fixed oil.
Pharmacokinetics
The serum concentration of eight fatty acids over time was measured after
oral administration of the fixed oil to six healthy volunteers. Six capsules of the
fixed oil (500 mg each) were administered in both the morning and evening.
The fatty acid concentrations in the serum were determined after each administration of the fixed oil as their methyl esters by gas chromatography–mass
spectrometry. After administration of the fixed oil, g-linolenic acid showed an
absorption–elimination pattern, and its area under the curve at 24 hours and
maximum concentration (Cmax) were significantly increased over baseline
values. The half-life of g-linolenic acid was shorter after the evening dose (2.7
hours) than after the morning treatment (4.4 hours). Serum levels of dihomog-linolenic acid and arachidonic acid did not increase after administration of the
fixed oil (62).
Rheumatoid arthritis
Four clinical trials have assessed the efficacy of the fixed oil for the treatment
of rheumatoid arthritis in small numbers of patients (27–30). Three of the trials
were unable to establish a significant benefit of using the fixed oil (27, 28).
A 12-week prospective trial involving 20 patients with rheumatoid arthritis
assessed the effects of the fixed oil (4.8 ml, equivalent to 360 mg g-linolenic acid,
daily). Prior to the study, all patients discontinued their pharmacological treatments (at least 4 weeks before the start) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (4 days before the start). In addition to the fixed oil, patients received
vitamin E daily and a product containing zinc, ascorbic acid, niacin and
pyridoxine. The symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, such as joint tenderness,
swollen joints, morning stiffness and pain, were assessed at the beginning of the
222

Oleum Oenotherae Biennis
trial and at 2-week intervals during treatment. Although three patients reported
improvements in symptoms during treatment, the study concluded that there
was no significant impact on the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis (27). Another
12-week prospective study involving 20 patients with rheumatoid arthritis
assessed the efficacy of 20 ml fixed oil daily (equivalent to 750 mg g-linolenic acid
daily) (28). The placebo group received olive oil (20 ml daily). All patients discontinued anti-inflammatory medications 7–10 days prior to the study. Although
the plasma concentrations of prostaglandin E2 decreased in four of the patients
treated with the fixed oil, no statistically significant changes in symptoms were
observed in either group (27). The third study was a 6-month, prospective,
double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial involving 40 patients with rheumatoid arthritis and upper gastrointestinal lesions associated with the use of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Nineteen patients received 6 g fixed oil
and 120 mg vitamin E daily, while 21 patients in the placebo group received
olive oil (6 g daily). Although all patients continued to take non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs, three in each group reduced their dosage by one tablet per
day. The results of this trial showed a significant reduction in morning stiffness
in patients receiving the fixed oil after 3 months of therapy, which was also seen
after 6 months of treatment. A significant reduction (P = 0.04) in pain and articular index was seen only in patients treated with olive oil (29).
A significant benefit of the fixed oil was seen in a double-blind, placebocontrolled study which assessed the efficacy of the fixed oil, alone or in combination with fish oil, for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in 34 patients
taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Following 12 months of treatment, a significant subjective improvement was observed in patients receiving
either the fixed oil (540 mg daily) or the fixed oil and fish oil (450 mg and
240 mg daily, respectively), as compared with the placebo group. In addition,
these patients had markedly reduced their intake of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (30).
Premenstrual syndrome
A review of four clinical studies (three with crossover design) reported improvements in the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS) following treatment
with the fixed oil (31–33). One of these, a double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study, assessed the efficacy of the fixed oil in women with PMS. After
8 weeks, improvements were seen in all the major clinical symptoms of PMS
in both groups. Symptoms improved by 60% in patients treated with the fixed
oil and by 40% in the placebo group. Irritability and depression were notably
improved in the group treated with the fixed oil (31). In a study without controls, 196 women with PMS received two capsules of the fixed oil (500 mg each)
twice daily during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. The women scored
their symptoms during the cycle before treatment and for two cycles after treatment. During the two cycles after treatment, irritability decreased by 77%,
depression by 74%, breast tenderness and pain by 76%, headache by 71% and
ankle swelling by 63%. These improvements were highly significant (P < 0.001)
223

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
(31). Another study without controls assessed the efficacy of the fixed oil in 68
women with severe PMS, who had failed to respond to at least one other therapeutic regime. Patients were treated with a graduated dosage of the fixed oil,
starting with two 500 mg capsules twice daily in the luteal phase only, going
up to four capsules twice daily during the whole cycle if there was no response
to treatment. Total remission of symptoms was seen in 61% of patients; 23%
had partial remission. Of the 36 women who had also experienced breast pain
as part of PMS, 26 had total relief from breast pain, five had partial relief and
five showed no improvement (33).
More recent reviews (63, 64) have assessed the clinical trials: seven placebocontrolled trials were identified, only five of which were randomized. Five of
the seven trials (three of which were randomized) reported improvements in
the symptoms of PMS. However, two of the best-performed studies, both
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover studies, failed to show
any beneficial effects of the fixed oil (34, 35). In one study, 27 women with
PMS received 12 capsules of the fixed oil (500 mg each) or placebo daily. Treatment with the fixed oil did not reduce either the magnitude or the cyclicity of
symptoms (34). The other study of 38 women with PMS found no difference
between the fixed oil (6 g daily for six cycles) and placebo in alleviating symptoms (35).
In a study without controls of 19 women with PMS, patients were treated
with four capsules of the fixed oil (500 mg each) twice daily for five cycles. A
reduction in the scores of individual symptoms (irritability, swollen abdomen,
breast discomfort, depression, anxiety, fatigue and general oedema) and total
PMS scores was observed after one cycle, and improvements continued over
all five cycles (65). The clinical and biochemical effects of the fixed oil were
investigated in 30 women with severe, incapacitating PMS. The patients
were treated with 3 g fixed oil or placebo daily, beginning on day 15 of the cycle
until the next menstrual period. Treatment with the fixed oil alleviated PMS
symptoms, as compared with treatment with the placebo. No changes were
found in the plasma levels of 6-keto-prostaglandin F1a, follicle-stimulating
hormone, luteinizing hormone, prolactin, progesterone, estradiol or testosterone (66).
Mastalgia
The effect of the fixed oil on mastalgia, one of the symptoms of PMS, was
assessed in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study.
Seventy-three women were treated with the fixed oil or placebo for 3 months. In
patients with both cyclical and non-cyclical mastalgia, treatment with the fixed
oil significantly reduced breast pain and tenderness (P < 0.02–0.05) (25). Another
double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial assessed the efficacy of the fixed oil
in 42 women with cyclic breast pain and tenderness. Patients were treated with
eight capsules (500 mg each) daily for 12 weeks. The fixed oil was significantly
more effective than placebo in reducing nodularity, breast tenderness and irritability, as well as promoting a feeling of well-being (P < 0.05) (67).
224

Oleum Oenotherae Biennis
A review of the randomized trials and studies without controls involving
291 women with severe persistent mastalgia was performed. Patients were
treated with either the fixed oil (six capsules of 500 mg), bromocriptine (5 mg)
or danazol (200 mg) daily for 3–6 months. In patients with cyclical mastalgia,
good responses were obtained in 45% of patients treated with the fixed oil, in
47% treated with bromocriptine and in 70% treated with danazol. The
response rate in patients with non-cyclical mastalgia was 27%, 20% and 31%,
respectively. Adverse reactions were reported in 2% of patients treated with
the fixed oil, in 33% of patients treated with bromocriptine and in 22% of those
treated with danazol (26). A review of 17 years of drug treatment at a mastalgia clinic described the efficacy of daily administration of danazol (200 mg),
bromocriptine (5 mg) and the fixed oil (six capsules of 500 mg) in 414 patients
(324 with cyclical and 90 with non-cyclical mastalgia). Treatment with danazol
was most effective (in 79% of patients); the fixed oil and bromocriptine were
effective in 58% and 54% of patients, respectively. However, the rates of
adverse reactions were higher in patients treated with danazol and bromocriptine (30% and 35%, respectively) than in those treated with the fixed oil (4%)
(24).
Diabetic neuropathy
Dietary supplementation with the fixed oil was associated with a clinical, neurophysiological and quantitative sensory improvement in 22 male and female
patients with diabetic polyneuropathy (22). After a preliminary trial in 22
patients with diabetes, positive effects were also reported in many neurological and neurophysiological parameters in a parallel double-blind study of 111
male and female patients with mild diabetic neuropathy (23).
Oral administration of the fixed oil to male patients with diabetes and
healthy male volunteers (20 g, enriched with vitamin E) daily for 1 week
enhanced erythropoiesis and changed the serum fatty acid profiles in both
groups. Inhibition of platelet-activating factor 4 and plasma b-thromboglobulin was also observed in both groups (68).
Menopausal flushing
The efficacy of the fixed oil was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 35 women with hot flushes. The women were
treated with either four capsules of the fixed oil (500 mg each, supplemented
with 10 mg natural vitamin E) or placebo twice daily for 6 months. No significant improvement in menopausal flushing was observed in women treated
with the oil, as compared with the placebo (36).
Uraemic skin disorders
The effects of oral administration of the fixed oil on plasma fatty acid concentrations and the symptoms of uraemic skin disorders (dryness, pruritus and
erythema) were evaluated in a double-blind study of haemodialysis patients.
225

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Patients treated with the fixed oil (2 g daily) for 6 weeks showed a significant
increase in plasma dihomo-g-linolenic acid (P < 0.05) and a significant decrease
in uraemic pruritus (P < 0.05) (69).

Contraindications
No information available.

Warnings
Oleum Oenotherae Biennis may precipitate symptoms of undiagnosed temporal lobe epilepsy, particularly in schizophrenic patients or patients taking epileptogenic drugs such as phenothiazines (70–72).

Precautions
General
Oleum Oenotherae Biennis should be used with caution in patients with a
history of epilepsy, particularly those with schizophrenia, or those taking
epileptogenic drugs such as phenothiazines (19, 70).

Drug interactions
Oleum Oenotherae Biennis inhibited platelet aggregation in animals (14, 40)
and inhibited platelet-activating factor in humans (68). Therefore, patients
taking anticoagulant drugs in conjunction with the fixed oil should be closely
monitored.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
and laboratory test interactions; carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy; nursing mothers; or
paediatric use. Therefore, Oleum Oenotherae Biennis should not be administered during pregnancy or lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Headaches, nausea, loose stools and diarrhoea following treatment with Oleum
Oenotherae Biennis have been reported (2). Administration of the fixed oil precipitated symptoms of undiagnosed temporal lobe epilepsy in schizophrenic
patients taking epileptogenic drugs, in particular phenothiazines (72).

Dosage forms
Fixed oil, neat or in capsule form (1, 13). Store in a well-filled, airtight glass
container, protected from heat and light.
226

Oleum Oenotherae Biennis

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 320–480 mg fixed oil (calculated as g-linolenic acid) in divided
doses for atopic eczema, and 240–320 mg in divided doses for mastalgia (19).

References
1. Von Bruchhausen F et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis, 8th ed.
Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
2. Briggs CJ. Evening primrose. Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal, 1986, 119:249–254.
3. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
4. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
5. Japanese standards of bulk quasi-drug ingredients. Tokyo, Yakuji Nippo, 1991.
6. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for healthcare
professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
7. Pignatti S. Flora d’Italia. Vol. II. Bologna, Edagricole, 1982.
8. Mabberley DJ. The plant book, 2nd ed. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1997.
9. Stuart M, ed. The encyclopedia of herbs and herbalism. London, Orbis Publishing, 1979.
10. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
11. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
12. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
13. Gibson R, Lines DR, Neumann MA. Gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) content of encapsulated evening primrose oil products. Lipids, 1992, 27:82–84.
14. Schölkens BA et al. Evening primrose oil, a dietary prostaglandin precursor, diminishes vascular reactivity to renin and angiotensin II in rats. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes
and Medicine, 1982, 8:273–285.
15. Dombek C, ed. The Lawrence review of natural products: facts and comparisons. St Louis,
MO, Walters Kluwer Co., 1993.
16. Biagi PL et al. A long-term study on the use of evening primrose oil (Efamol)
in atopic children. Drugs under Experimental and Clinical Research, 1988, 14:285–
290.
17. Biagi PL et al. The effect of gamma-linolenic acid on clinical status, red cell fatty
acid composition and membrane microviscosity in infants with atopic dermatitis.
Drugs under Experimental and Clinical Research, 1994, 20:77–84.
18. Bordoni A et al. Evening primrose oil (Efamol) in the treatment of children with
atopic eczema. Drugs under Experimental and Clinical Research, 1987, 14:291–297.
19. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 30th ed. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
20. Morse PF et al. Meta-analysis of placebo-controlled studies of the efficacy of Epogam
in the treatment of atopic eczema. Relationship between plasma essential fatty acid
changes and clinical response. British Journal of Dermatology, 1989, 121:75–90.
21. Wright S, Burton JL. Oral evening primrose seed oil improves atopic eczema. Lancet,
1982, ii:1120–1122.
22. Jamal GA et al. The effect of gamma-linolenic acid on human diabetic peripheral
neuropathy: a double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Diabetic Medicine, 1990, 7:
319–323.
23. Keen H et al. Treatment of diabetic neuropathy with gamma-linolenic acid. The
gamma-Linolenic Acid Multicenter Trial Group. Diabetes Care, 1993, 16:8–15.

227

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
24. Gateley CA et al. Drug treatments for mastalgia: 17 years’ experience in the Cardiff
mastalgia clinic. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 1992, 85:12–15.
25. Pashby NL et al. A clinical trial of evening primrose oil in mastalgia. British Journal
of Surgery, 1981, 68:801–824.
26. Pye JK, Mansel RE, Hughes LE. Clinical experience of drug treatments for mastalgia. Lancet, 1985, ii:373–377.
27. Hansen TM et al. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with prostaglandin E1 precursors cis-linolenic acid and gamma-linolenic acid. Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology, 1983, 12:85–88.
28. Jantti J et al. Evening primrose oil and olive oil in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Clinical Rheumatology, 1989, 8:238–244.
29. Brzeski M et al. Evening primrose oil in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and sideeffects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. British Journal of Rheumatology, 1991,
30:370–372.
30. Belch JJ et al. Effects of altering dietary essential fatty acids on requirements for
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a
double-blind placebo-controlled study. Annals of Rheumatic Diseases, 1988, 47:96–
104.
31. Horrobin DF. The role of essential fatty acids and prostaglandins in the premenstrual syndrome. Journal of Reproductive Medicine, 1983, 28:465–468.
32. O’Brian PMS et al. Premenstrual syndrome: clinical studies on essential fatty acids.
In: Horrobin DF, ed. Omega-6-essential fatty acids. Pathophysiology and roles in clinical
medicine. New York, NY, Wiley-Liss, 1990:523–545.
33. Brush MG. Evening primrose oil in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome. In:
Horrobin DF, ed. Clinical uses of essential fatty acids. Montreal, Eden Press, 1983.
34. Collins A et al. Essential fatty acids in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome.
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 1993, 81:93–98.
35. Khoo SK et al. Evening primrose oil and treatment of premenstrual syndrome.
Medical Journal of Australia, 1990, 153:189–192.
36. Chenoy R et al. Effect of oral gamolenic acid from evening primrose oil on
menopausal flushing. British Medical Journal, 1994, 308:501–503.
37. Oliwiecki S, Burton JL. Evening primrose oil and marine oil in the treatment of
psoriasis. Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, 1994, 19:127–129.
38. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, November 6, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
39. Dorsch W, Schmidt O. Antiasthmatic effects of gamma-linolenic acid—highdose evening primrose oil and borage oil stimulate allergen tachyphylaxis of
sensitized guinea pigs and prevent allergen sensitization. Phytomedicine, 1995,
4:271–275.
40. De La Cruz JP. Effect of evening primrose oil on platelet aggregation in rabbits fed
an atherogenic diet. Thrombosis Research, 1997, 87:141–149.
41. Sugano M et al. Influence of Korean pine (Pinus koraiensis)-seed oil containing
cis-5, cis-9, cis-12-octadecatrienoic acid on polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism,
eicosanoid production and blood pressure of rats. British Journal of Nutrition, 1994,
72:775–783.
42. Hong JT et al. Effects of evening primrose oil on serum lipoproteins and immune
responses. Food, Agriculture and Immunology, 1991, 3:37–42.
43. Fukushima M et al. Comparative hypocholesterolemic effect of six dietary oils in
cholesterol-fed rats after long-term feeding. Lipids, 1997, 32:1069–1074.
44. Engler MM. Comparative study of diets enriched with evening primrose, blackcurrant, borage, or fungal oils on blood pressure and pressor responses in spontaneously

228

Oleum Oenotherae Biennis
hypertensive rats. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 1993, 49:
809–814.
45. Hoffmann P et al. Cardiovascular effects of antihypertensive drugs as affected by
dietary polyunsaturates. Biomedica Biochimia Acta, 1984, 43:195–198.
46. Mills DE, Ward RP. Effects of eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5w3) on stress reactivity
in rats. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 1986, 182:
127–131.
47. Mills DE et al. Gamma-linolenic acid attenuates cardiovascular responses to stress
in borderline hypertensive rats. Lipids, 1985, 20:573–577.
48. Charnock JS et al. Gamma-linolenic acid, blackcurrant seed and evening primrose
oil in the prevention of cardiac arrhythmia in aged rats. Nutrition Research, 1994,
14:1089–1099.
49. Al-Shabanah OA et al. Effect of evening primrose oil on gastric ulceration and
secretion induced by various ulcerogenic and necrotizing agents in rats. Food and
Chemical Toxicology, 1997, 35:769–775.
50. Delbarre F, De Gery A. Immunomoderated effect of lipids from Oenothera seed
extracts on adjuvant polyarthritis in the rat. Rhumatologie, 1980, 10:361–363.
51. Ahn YK et al. Effects of evening primrose oil on the immune responses in mice.
Yakhak Hoe Chi, 1992, 36:93–109.
52. Morris GM et al. Modulation of the cell kinetics of pig skin by the topical application of evening primrose oil or lioxasol. Cell Proliferation, 1997, 30:311–323.
53. Cameron NE et al. The effects of evening primrose oil on nerve function and
capillarization in streptozotocin-diabetic rats: modulation by the cyclo-oxygenase
inhibitor flurbiprofen. British Journal of Pharmacology, 1993, 109:972–979.
54. Dines KC et al. Comparison of the effects of evening primrose oil and triglycerides
containing gamma-linolenic acid on nerve conduction and blood flow in diabetic
rats. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1995, 273:49–55.
55. Tomlinson DR et al. Essential fatty acid treatment—effects on nerve conduction,
polyol pathway and axonal transport in streptozotocin-diabetic rats. Diabetologia,
1989, 32:655–659.
56. Varma PK et al. Protection against ethanol-induced embryonic damage by administering gamma-linolenic and linoleic acids. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Medicine,
1982, 8:641–645.
57. Bamford JTM et al. Atopic eczema unresponsive to evening primrose oil (linoleic
and gamma-linolenic acids). Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 1985, 13:
959–965.
58. Berth-Jones J, Graham-Brown RAC. Placebo-controlled trial of essential fatty acid
supplementation in atopic dermatitis. Lancet, 1993, 341:1557–1560.
59. Whitaker DK et al. Evening primrose oil (Epogam) in the treatment of chronic hand
dermatitis: disappointing therapeutic results. Dermatology, 1996, 193:115–120.
60. Stewart JCM et al. Treatment of severe and moderately severe atopic dermatitis
with evening primrose oil (Epogam), a multicenter study. Journal of Nutritional
Medicine, 1991, 2:9–15.
61. Hederos CA, Berg A. Epogam evening primrose oil treatment in atopic dermatitis
and asthma. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 1996, 75:494–497.
62. Martens-Lobenhoffer J, Meyer FP. Pharmacokinetic data of gamma-linolenic acid in
healthy volunteers after the administration of evening primrose oil (Epogam). International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 1998, 36:363–366.
63. Budeiri D et al. Is evening primrose oil of value in the treatment of premenstrual
syndrome? Controlled Clinical Trials, 1996, 17:60–68.
64. Kleijnen J. Evening primrose oil. British Medical Journal, 1994, 309:824–825.
65. Larsson B et al. Evening primrose oil in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome.
Current Therapeutic Research, 1989, 46:58–63.

229

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
66. Puolakka J, Mansel RE, Hughes LE. Biochemical and clinical effects of treating
the premenstrual syndrome with prostaglandin synthesis precursors. Journal of
Reproductive Medicine, 1985, 30:149–153.
67. Mansel RE et al. The use of evening primrose in mastalgia. In: Horrobin DF, ed.
Clinical uses of essential fatty acids. Montreal, Eden Press, 1983.
68. Van Doormaal JJ et al. Effects of short-term high-dose intake of evening primrose
oil on plasma and cellular fatty acid compositions, alpha-tocopherol levels, and
erythropoiesis in normal and type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetic men. Diabetologia,
1988, 31:576–584.
69. Yoshimoto-Furuie K et al. Effects of oral supplementation with evening primrose
oil for six weeks on plasma essential fatty acids and uremic skin symptoms in
hemodialysis patients. Nephron, 1999, 81:151–159.
70. Dukes MNG, ed. Meyler’s side effects of drugs, 13th ed. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 1996.
71. Holman CP et al. A trial of evening primrose oil in the treatment of chronic schizophrenia. Journal of Orthomology and Psychiatry, 1983, 12:302–304.
72. Vaddadi KS. The use of gamma-linolenic acid and linoleic acid to differentiate between temporal lobe epilepsy and schizophrenia. Prostaglandins and Medicine, 1981,
6:375–379.

230

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici

Definition
Rhizoma Piperis Methystici consists of the dried rhizomes of Piper methysticum
G. Forst. (Piperaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Macropiper latifolium Miq., M. methystiscum (G. Forst.) Hook. et Arnott, Piper
inebrians Soland (3).

Selected vernacular names
Ava, ava root, awa, gea, gi, kao, kava, kavakava, kava-kava, kava-kava root,
kavapipar, kawa, kawa kawa, kawa pepper, Kawapfeffer, malohu, maluk,
maori kava, meruk, milik, racine de poivre enivrant, Rauschpfeffer, rhizoma de
kava-kava, rhizoma di kava-kava, yagona, yaqona (3–5).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to and cultivated in the islands of Oceania, from Hawaii to Papua
New Guinea, with the notable exception of New Caledonia, New Zealand and
most of the Solomon Islands (5).

Description
A perennial shrub up to 7 m high, robust and fairly succulent. Leaves cordate,
pointed, smooth and green on both sides, up to 25 cm long. Root can reach
60 cm in length and 8 cm in diameter; may eventually become a heavy knotted
mass, 8–25 cm wide. Petioles up to 6 cm long; flowers in irregular spadices with
lateral root up to 3 m long (5).

Plant material of interest: dried rhizome
General appearance
Irregular, transverse and longitudinal pieces, varying considerably in size and
shape: 3–20 cm long and 1–5 cm in diameter. Outer surface light yellowish or
greyish-brown, longitudinally wrinkled, with large whitish circular root scars.
231

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Fracture coarsely fibrous, inner surface yellow-white; bark thin; xylem
distinctly radiate; pith large (1, 2, 6, 7).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight, agreeable; taste: sweetish, pungent, sometimes slightly bitter,
followed by slight numbness (1, 2, 7).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section through the xylem shows small channels with vascular
bundles; cross section through the xylem shows narrow vessels, which are
located around the pith and alternate with large pith rays. Additional vessels
across the pith; xylem has tracheid-like elements; phloem has fewer and
thinner-walled cells. Secretory canals contain a fine, brown resinous mass.
Unpeeled rhizome has a narrow cork-layer. Primary bark contains rays of collenchyma, tissues, numerous resin and storage cells around the phloem (1–3).

Powdered plant material
Light yellow-brown. Contains large oval pith cells. Secretion canals containing
yellow to red-brown masses of resin; elongated cells of the medullary rays
porous and slightly lignified. Vessels lignified and reticulate; fibres slightly lignified, large lumen and occasionally branched oval ends. Xylem parenchyma,
cells lignified and slightly elongated. Numerous simple or 2–3 compound starch
grains, the individual grains being spheroidal or planoconvex, 10–30 mm and
sometimes up to 45 mm in diameter, many showing radial or triangular central
clefts. Calcium oxalate crystals absent (1, 2, 7).

General identity tests
Macroscopic, microscopic and microchemical examinations (1, 2, 7), and thinlayer chromatography for the presence of characteristic unsaturated a-pyrones
known as kava pyrones (1, 2, 8).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (9).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1, 2).

Total ash
Not more than 8% (1, 2).
232

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1.5% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 5% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (2, 3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (10). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (10), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (9) and
pesticide residues (11).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (9).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (9) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 3.5% kava pyrones, as determined by infrared absorption spectroscopy at 1705 ± 5 cm-1 (2). Complete qualitative analytical profiles
can be obtained by high-performance liquid chromatography–electrospray
mass spectrometry (12). A high-performance liquid chromatography method is
also available for quantitative analysis (3).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are kava lactones (also known as kava pyrones) with
the major lactones being kawain (1.8%), methysticin (1.2%), dihydromethysticin (0.5%), demethoxyyangonin (1.0%), yangonin (1.0%) and dihydrokawain (1.0%). At least 13 other lactones, two chalcones and a number of free
aromatic acids are known (3–5, 13). The structures of the representative lactones are presented below.
233

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
O
O
R¢

OCH3

H

kawain

R = R¢ = H

methysticin

R, R¢ = O-CH2-O

R
O
O
R¢

OCH3

H

dihydrokawain

R = R¢ = H

dihydromethysticin

R, R¢ = O-CH2-O

R
O
O

yangonin
OCH3

R = OCH3

demethoxyyangonin R = H

R

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Short-term symptomatic treatment of mild states of anxiety or insomnia, due
to nervousness, stress or tension (14–24).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
To induce relaxation, reduce weight and treat fungal infections (5).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of asthma, common cold, cystitis, gonorrhoea, headaches, menstrual
irregularities, urinary infections and warts (4, 5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Behavioural effects
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous extract of Rhizoma Piperis
Methystici (62.5 mg/kg body weight) decreased the spontaneous activity of
mice. This effect lasted for 2 hours without loss of muscle tone (25). The same
extract, however, was not active in mice or rats when administered orally in
single doses of 0.5–2.5 g/kg body weight. A dichloromethane extract of the
rhizome (150 mg/kg body weight, administered intraperitoneally) decreased
spontaneous motility by 46%, and markedly reduced motor control (by 50%)
234

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici
in mice (25, 26). At this dose, the extract also induced hypnosis and analgesia (25). Intraperitoneal administration of aqueous, dichloromethane and
lyophilized aqueous extracts of the rhizome (62.5–250 mg/kg body weight)
reduced spontaneous activity in mice and rats (27, 28). Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous or dichloromethane extract of the rhizome (120 mg/kg
body weight) suppressed apomorphine-induced hyperactivity in rats (25).
Intraperitoneal administration of a lipid-soluble fraction of an aqueous rhizome
extract (doses up to 300 mg/kg body weight) decreased the conditioned avoidance response in rats. An aqueous extract, however, was inactive at doses up
to 500 mg/kg body weight (27). Intraperitoneal administration of an extract
of the rhizome (equivalent to 50–100 mg kava pyrones/kg body weight) or
(±)-kawain, a synthetic kava lactone (10–50 mg/kg body weight), reduced
muscle tone in cats (29).
Analgesic activity
Intraperitoneal administration of a dichloromethane extract of the rhizome
(150 mg/kg body weight) produced analgesia in mice (25). Intraperitoneal or
intragastric administration of an aqueous or lipid extract of the rhizome
(150–250 mg/kg body weight) produced analgesia in mice, as measured by tailflick reaction times and suppression of acetic acid-induced writhing (30). Both
dihydrokawain and dihydromethysticin exhibited analgesic effects when
administered intraperitoneally to rats (140 mg/kg body weight), as determined
by an increase in tail-flick reaction times (31).
Neurological effects
Depression of the central nervous system was observed in rodents after
intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous rhizome extract (50–170 mg/kg
body weight) (32). Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous extract
(300 mg/kg body weight) or a chloroform extract (140 mg/kg body weight) of
the rhizome depressed the central nervous system and potentiated the effects
of barbiturates in mice. Administration of dihydromethysticin to mice potentiated pentobarbital-induced sleeping time by 400%, while dihydrokawain,
yangonin and kawain were only moderately active (150–235%) (33). A
dichloromethane extract of the rhizome administered intraperitoneally to mice
(150 mg/kg body weight) induced hypnosis (25). The hypnotic and sedative
effects of a dichloromethane rhizome extract (300 mg/kg body weight, administered intraperitoneally) were significantly prolonged in mice by the concurrent administration of ethanol (2 g/kg body weight; P < 0.001) (30). A saline
extract of the rhizome had an effect on crayfish abdominal ganglia in vitro
(0.05 g/ml) (34). Intraperitoneal administration of an extract of the rhizome
(equivalent to 50–100 mg kava pyrones/kg body weight) to cats had a significant effect on EEG recordings, inducing high-amplitude delta waves, spindlelike formation, and continuous alpha- or beta-synchronization in amygdala
recordings (P < 0.001). Hippocampal responses, following stimulation of the
235

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
amygdala nucleus, increased significantly in amplitude in cats treated intraperitoneally with the rhizome extract (equivalent to 100 mg kava pyrones/kg body
weight; P < 0.01) or (±)-kawain (50 mg/kg body weight; P < 0.05) (29).
The neuroprotective effects of an acetone extract of the rhizome and kava
pyrones have been demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. A standardized
acetone extract of the rhizome, methysticin and dihydromethysticin protected
rodents against hypoxia or ischaemia-induced cerebral damage (35). The standardized extract also protected against neuronal damage in cultured neurons
from chick embryo cerebral hemispheres (36).
Although the neuroprotective mechanisms of the rhizome are not
well understood, recent investigations have indicated that kava pyrones may
exert their effects by activating several neurotransmitter systems, such as the
adrenergic (37), mesolimbic dopaminergic (38), gabaminergic (39), glutamatergic (40, 41), and serotonergic receptor systems (42, 43). An extract of the
rhizome containing 58% kava pyrones enhanced the binding of [3H]muscimol
to g-aminobutyric acid-A receptors in a concentration-dependent manner in rat
hippocampus, amygdala and medulla oblongata in vitro (ED50 200–300 mmol/l)
(39). However, another study found no significant interaction in vitro or in vivo
of a dichloromethane rhizome extract or kava pyrones with g-aminobutyric
acid (A and B) or benzodiazepine receptor binding sites (44). Both kawain and
dihydromethysticin (10–100 mmol/l) reduced the field potential changes
induced by the serotonin-1A agonist, ipsapirone, in the CA1 and CA3 areas of
guinea-pig hippocampal slices in vitro. These results suggest that both compounds may modulate serotonin-1A receptor activity (43). Methysticin and
kawain inhibited the uptake of 3H-labelled norepinephrine, but not of 3Hlabelled serotonin, in synaptosomes prepared from the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of rats (37). Intragastric administration of (+)-dihydromethysticin in
a single dose (100 mg/kg body weight), or chronic intragastric administration
of (±)-kawain (10.8 mg/kg body weight) daily for 78 days to rats did not alter
dopamine or serotonin levels in the striatal or cortical brain regions (45).
Anticonvulsant activity
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous extract (300 mg/kg body weight)
or a chloroform extract (140 mg/kg body weight) of the rhizome to mice inhibited strychnine-induced convulsions (33). The anticonvulsant activity of
methysticin and other kava pyrones against electroshock- and chemicallyinduced seizures has been demonstrated in mice and rats (46–48). Intraperitoneal administration of dihydromethysticin and dihydrokawain inhibited
electroshock-induced seizures at doses of 25 and 60 mg/kg body weight, respectively, in mice and rats (47). Methysticin (10–100 mmol/l) was also active in different in vitro models of seizure-like events using extracellular recordings in rat
temporal cortex slices containing the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex.
Methysticin suppressed epileptiform activity independent of the stimulus (low
calcium or magnesium, or high potassium perfusion medium), suggesting a
236

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici
direct effect of the compound on neuron membranes, thus inhibiting neuron
excitability (40). Other studies have demonstrated that (+)-kawain and (±)kawain inhibited voltage-dependent calcium and sodium channels of rat cerebrocortical synaptosomes (41, 49, 50). In these synaptosomes, it was also
shown that (±)-kawain inhibited the increase in intracellular calcium and glutamate release induced by veratridine and potassium chloride (49). Both (±)kawain and methysticin inhibited voltage-dependent sodium channels in rat
CA1 hippocampal neurons in vitro (1–400 mmol/l) (51).
Antispasmodic activity
An aqueous rhizome extract, kawain, dihydrokawain, methysticin and dihydromethysticin inhibited serotonin and nicotine-induced contractions of
guinea-pig ileum in vitro (52, 53). The antispasmodic effects were attributed to
a direct musculotropic action. Dihydromethysticin also inhibited contractions
of rat colon and uterus in vitro induced by serotonin, acetylcholine and
barium (53). Desmethoxyyangonin, dihydromethysticin and kawain inhibited
serotonin-induced contractions of rat uterus in vitro at concentrations of
3.2, 7.5 and 10.0 mg/ml, respectively (54). Aqueous, dichloromethane and
lyophilized extracts of the rhizome induced relaxation of rat uterus in vitro
(ED50 22.5 mg/ml) (28). The effects of an aqueous extract of the rhizome on
muscle contractility and neuromuscular transmission were investigated in
mouse hemidiaphragms and frog sartorius muscles in vitro using twitch tension
and intracellular recording techniques. The extract (2–5 mg/ml) induced muscle
relaxation by direct action on muscle contractility rather than by inhibition of
neuromuscular transmission (55).
Antimicrobial activity
A hydroalcoholic extract of the rhizome inhibited the growth in vitro of
Aspergillus fumigatus, A. niger, Penicillium digitatum, Rhizopus nigricans, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, Candida albicans and Saccharomyces pastorianus (56).
However, an aqueous extract of the rhizome did not inhibit the growth in
vitro of Trichophyton rubrum, Microsporum canis or Epidermophyton floccosum (57).

Clinical pharmacology
Anxiety
At least seven double-blind, controlled clinical studies have assessed the efficacy of two extracts of Rhizoma Piperis Methystici for symptomatic treatment
of anxiety (17, 18, 21–24, 58). Two of these studies were performed with a
hydroalcoholic extract standardized to contain 15% kava pyrones (22, 58),
while the other studies used an extract standardized to contain 70% kava
pyrones (17, 18, 21, 23, 24).
Two placebo-controlled trials investigated the effect of both standardized
extracts in women with climacteric psychosomatic disturbances. In the first
study, 40 such women were treated with either a placebo or 200–400 mg extract
237

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
(30–60 mg kava pyrones) daily for 8–12 weeks. Using the Kuppermann Index and
Anxiety Status Index, the extract was found to be superior to the placebo (22).
In the second study, a further 40 such women were treated with 300 mg extract
(210 mg kava pyrones) daily for 8 weeks in a randomized, placebocontrolled, double-blind study. The outcome was assessed using the Hamilton
Anxiety Rating Scale; the Depression Status Inventory and the Kuppermann
Index were also used. The total score on the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale
decreased after 1 week of treatment with the extract, and reached a plateau at 4
weeks. The therapeutic response to the extract was significant, as compared with
the response to the placebo (P < 0.001) (23). After 8 weeks of treatment with the
extract, the mean score on the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale decreased from
31.1 to 5.5. In the group which received the placebo, the mean score decreased
from 30.15 to 22.50. The mean score on the Depression Status Inventory
decreased significantly from 42.5 to 24.8 (P < 0.01). The mean score on the Kuppermann Index also decreased significantly from 20.35 to 3.60 (P < 0.01) (23).
A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 58 patients with symptoms of
anxiety, tension or agitation of non-psychotic origin assessed the effectiveness
of the extract containing 70% kava pyrones (equivalent to 210 mg kava pyrones)
daily for 4 weeks. The outcome was assessed using the total score on the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, and other rating scales (the Erlanger Scale for Anxiety,
Clinical Global Impressions and the Fischer Somatic Symptoms). After 1 week,
patients treated with the extract showed a reduction in the total score on the
Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale as compared with the placebo group. The difference between the scores of the two groups increased after 4 weeks of treatment (17).
A randomized double-blind comparative study assessed the efficacy of the
extract containing 70% kava pyrones in 172 patients with symptoms of anxiety,
tension and agitation of non-psychotic origin. Patients received either 300 mg
extract (210 mg kava pyrones), 15 mg oxazepam or 9 mg bromazepam daily for
6 weeks. The main criterion for assessment was the total score on the Hamilton
Anxiety Rating Scale. No significant difference was observed between the treatments (24). In another randomized study which involved several centres, the efficacy of the extract containing 70% kava pyrones was tested in 100 patients with
anxiety of non-psychotic origin (as defined in the Diagnostic and statistical manual
of mental disorders, 3rd ed. (59)). Patients were treated with either a placebo or
300 mg extract (equivalent to 210 mg kava pyrones) daily for 24 weeks and the
outcome was assessed using the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale. Adjunct rating
scales were the Clinical Global Impressions and Von Zerssen mood scale. In
patients treated with the extract, the decrease in the Hamilton Anxiety Rating
Scale (mean scores of 30.7 and 9.7 at weeks 0 and 24, respectively) was significant as compared with the placebo group (P < 0.005). The scores on the Clinical
Global Impressions and Von Zerssen mood scale also improved after 24 weeks
of treatment with the extract (21). A randomized study of 58 patients also
assessed the efficacy of the extract containing 70% kava pyrones for the treatment of anxiety of non-psychotic origin. Patients were treated with either a
238

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici
placebo or 300 mg extract (equivalent to 210 mg kava pyrones) daily for 4 weeks
and therapeutic efficacy was assessed using the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale.
After 1 week, there was a significant reduction in the scores (mean scores of 25.6
and 16.2 at weeks 0 and 1, respectively) in the treated group as compared with
the placebo group (P = 0.004) (18).
A randomized, double-blind pilot study investigated the effects of the extract
containing 15% kava pyrones in 59 patients with pre-operative anxiety (58).
Although improvements in mood were observed using a psychostatus score,
only two doses of the extract (equivalent to 60 mg kava pyrones daily) were
administered, and thus the clinical significance of this study is questionable.
An additional nine double-blind studies have been performed with
(±)-kawain (60, 61). Two of the studies were comparative studies and seven
were placebo-controlled. Therapeutic anxiolytic activity was achieved with
doses of 200–600 mg (±)-kawain daily (60). Kawain is available in Germany and
Switzerland as an over-the-counter medication.
Insomnia
Two single-blind and four double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials investigated the effect of a rhizome extract standardized to contain 70% kava
pyrones on EEG recordings, and intellectual and motor functions of healthy volunteers (14, 16, 62–65). Changes in EEG recordings and psychomotor test
results showed no evidence of a decrease in vigilance or responsiveness in volunteers treated with 600 mg extract (equivalent to 420 mg kava pyrones) daily
for 5 days (64, 65). Examination of EEG recordings during sleep of healthy volunteers given a single dose of 300 mg extract (equivalent to 210 mg kava
pyrones) showed an increased sleep spindle density of 20% and an increase in
slow-wave sleep (i.e. deep sleep), but the rapid eye movement phase was not
suppressed (14). Daily doses of 300 or 600 mg extract (equivalent to 210 or
420 mg kava pyrones), respectively, for 1 week increased the beta/alpha index
typical for the pharmaco-EEG profile of anxiolytics. The increase in beta activity was most marked in the beta2 range (16). In two studies, administration of
300 mg extract (equivalent to 210 mg kava pyrones) daily for either 8 or 14 days,
taken with or without ethanol, had no influence on the safety-related performance of healthy volunteers (62, 63).
In a randomized, double-blind crossover study involving 12 healthy volunteers, administration of daily single doses of a rhizome extract standardized to
contain 30% kava pyrones (400 mg extract containing 120 mg kava pyrones)
was compared with daily single doses of diazepam (10 mg) or a placebo in a 7day trial. Changes in EEG recordings and psychometric test results showed no
evidence of a decrease in vigilance in the group treated with the extract (66).
Safety-related performance was assessed in another study after administration
of an extract standardized to contain 30% kava pyrones, bromazepam or a
combination of extract and bromazepam. Safety-related performance remained
unaffected in healthy volunteers treated daily with 400 mg extract (equivalent
239

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
to 120 mg kava pyrones for 14 days), whereas it was impaired after treatment
with bromazepam (9 mg daily) or the extract/bromazepam combination. No
differences were observed following treatment with bromazepam or the combination, indicating that the extract did not have an additive effect when given
in combination with bromazepam (67).

Contraindications
During pregnancy and lactation, and in patients with endogenous depression
(15) or liver disease.1

Warnings
Rhizoma Piperis Methystici should not be taken for more than 3 months
without medical advice. Even when administered within the recommended
dosage range, motor reflexes and the ability to drive or operate heavy machinery may be adversely affected (15).

Precautions
Drug interactions
The effectiveness of centrally acting drugs such as alcohol, barbiturates and
other psychopharmacological agents may be potentiated (15). One case of possible drug interaction between Rhizoma Piperis Methystici, alprazolam, cimetidine and terazosin has been reported (69). The clinical significance of this
interaction has not yet been established.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Oral administration of up to 600 mg/kg body weight of a standardized extract
containing 70% kava pyrones did not increase the formation of micronucleated
polychromatic erythrocytes and did not lead to any change in the ratio of polychromatic to normochromatic erythrocytes. There was no increase in the
number of revertants in Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98, TA100, TA1535,
TA1537 and TA1538 with or without metabolic activation, at doses up to
2.5 mg/plate in the Salmonella/microsome assay (3).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.
1

Several cases of liver toxicity have been reported in Europe following use of herbal products containing extracts of Rhizoma Piperis Methystici (68).

240

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; or paediatric use. Therefore,
Rhizoma Piperis Methystici should not be administered to children without
medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
In a surveillance study involving 4049 patients who received a standardized
extract of Rhizoma Piperis Methystici containing 70% kava pyrones (150 mg
extract, equivalent to 105 mg kava pyrones) orally daily for 7 weeks, adverse
reactions were reported in 61 patients (1.5%). The major reactions were gastrointestinal complaints or allergic skin reactions (3, 20). In a study of 3029
patients given a standardized extract of the rhizome containing 30% kava
pyrones (800 mg extract, equivalent to 240 mg kava pyrones) orally daily for 4
weeks, adverse reactions were reported in 2.3% of patients. Nine cases of allergic reactions, 31 cases of gastrointestinal complaints, 22 cases of headache or
dizziness, and 11 cases of other undefined problems were reported (3, 70).
Chronic administration of the rhizome or preparations thereof may cause a
transient, yellow discoloration of the skin and nails, which is reversible upon
discontinuation of the drug (15). Excessive, chronic abuse of infusions of the
rhizome has been historically associated with a scaly, eruptive dermopathy of
unknown etiology (71). Allergic skin reactions and ichthyosis have also been
reported (72–74). In two patients, a reaction was seen in areas rich in sebaceous
glands following 3 weeks of systemic antidepressant therapy with the rhizome.
The reaction resulted in the formation of papules and plaques on the face, and
ventral and dorsal thorax (75). One study in an Australian aboriginal community found that chronic abuse of the rhizome led to malnutrition and weight
loss, increased levels of g-glutamyltransferase, decreased levels of plasma
protein, and reduced platelet volume and lymphocyte numbers (76). In a
healthy volunteer, disturbances of visual accommodation, such as enlargement
of the pupils, and disturbances in oculomotor equilibrium, were reported following the ingestion of large doses of kava (77). Chronic consumption (6
months) of large quantities of an infusion of the rhizome (5–6 cups daily) has
been reported to cause anorexia, diarrhoea and visual disturbances (73). A single
case report of athetosis involving the limbs, trunk, neck and facial musculature,
with marked athetosis of the tongue, was associated with chronic consumption of large quantities of the rhizome (78).
There is one report of acute hepatitis in a 39-year-old woman following
ingestion of a rhizome preparation (79). However, the identity of the material
was not authenticated.
241

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Dosage forms
Comminuted crude drug and extracts for oral use (15). Store in a tightly closed
container, away from light.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: crude drug and extracts equivalent to 60–210 mg kava pyrones
(15, 18, 21–24).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. Deutscher Arzneimittel-Codex. Stuttgart, Govi-Verlag, 1998.
3. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
4. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
5. Singh YN. Kava: an overview. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1992, 37:13–45.
6. Gathercoal EN, Wirth EH. Pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1947.
7. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
8. Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant drug analysis, 2nd ed. Berlin, Springer, 1996.
9. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
10. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
11. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
12. He X-G, Lin L-Z, Lian L-Z. Electrospray high-performance liquid chromatography–
mass spectrometry in phytochemical analysis of kava (Piper methysticum) extract.
Planta Medica, 1997, 63:70–74.
13. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
14. Emser W, Bartylla K. Verbesserung der Schlafqualität. Zur Wirkung von KavaExtrakt WS 1490 auf das Schlafmuster bei Gesunden. Neurologie/Psychiatrie, 1991,
5:636–642.
15. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
16. Johnson D et al. Neurophysiologisches Wirkprofil und Verträglichkeit von KavaExtrakt WS 1490. Eine Pilotstudie mit randomisierter Auswertung. Neurologie/Psychiatrie, 1991, 5:349–354.
17. Kinzler E, Kromer J, Lehmann E. Wirksamkeit eines Kava-Spezialextraktes bei
Patienten mit Angst-, Spannungs- und Erregungszuständen nicht-psychotischer
Genese. Doppelblind-Studie gegen Plazebo über 4 Wochen. Arzneimittel-Forschung,
1991, 41:584–588.
18. Lehmann E et al. Efficacy of a special kava extract (Piper methysticum) in patients with
states of anxiety, tension and excitedness of non-mental origin—a double-blind
placebo-controlled study of four weeks’ treatment. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:113–119.
19. Schulz V, Hübner W-D, Ploch M. Clinical trials with phyto-psychopharmacological
agents. Phytomedicine, 1997, 4:379–387.
20. Siegers SP et al. Ergebnisse der Anwendungsbeobachtung L 1090 mit Laitan Kapseln.
Ärztliche Forschung, 1992, 39:6–11.

242

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici
21. Volz HP, Kieser M. Kava-kava extract WS 1490 versus placebo in anxiety disorders—
a randomized placebo-controlled 25-week outpatient trial. Pharmacopsychiatry, 1997,
30:1–5.
22. Warnecke G et al. Wirksamkeit von Kawa-Kawa-Extrakt beim klimakterischen
Syndrom. Klinische Wirksamkeit und Verträglichkeit von Kawa-Extrakt WS 1490.
Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1990, 11:81–86.
23. Warnecke G. Psychosomatische Dysfunktionen im weiblichen Klimakterium.
Fortschritte der Medizin, 1991, 109:119–122.
24. Woelk H et al. Behandlung von Angst-Patienten. Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Medizin,
1993, 69:271–277.
25. Jamieson DD et al. Comparison of the central nervous system activity of the
aqueous and lipid extract of kava (Piper methysticum). Archives internationales de Pharmacodynamie et de Thérapie, 1989, 301:66–80.
26. Duffield PH, Jamieson D. Development of tolerance to kava in mice. Clinical and
Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology, 1991, 18:571–578.
27. Duffield PH, Jamieson DD, Duffield AM. Effect of aqueous and lipid-soluble extracts
of kava on the conditioned avoidance response in rats. Archives internationales de Pharmacodynamie et de Thérapie, 1989, 301:81–90.
28. O’Hara MJ et al. Preliminary characterization of aqueous extracts of Piper methysticum (kava, kawa kawa). Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1965, 54:1021–1025.
29. Holm E et al. Untersuchungen zum Wirkungsprofil von D,L-Kavain. Zerebrale
Angriffsorte und Schlaf-Wach-Rhythmus im Tierexperiment. Arzneimittel-Forschung,
1991, 41:673–683.
30. Jamieson DD, Duffield PH. The antinociceptive actions of kava components in mice.
Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology, 1990, 17:495–507.
31. Brüggemann F, Meyer HJ. Die analgetische Wirkung der Kawa-Inhaltsstoffe
Dihydrokawain und Dihydromethysticin. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1962, 12:407–
409.
32. Furgiuele AR et al. Central activity of aqueous extracts of Piper methysticum (kava).
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1965, 54:247–252.
33. Klohs MW et al. A chemical and pharmacological investigation of Piper methysticum
Forst. Journal of Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, 1959, 1:95–103.
34. Rechnitz GA et al. Sensing neuroactive agents in Hawaiian plants. Analytica Chimica
Acta, 1997, 337:297–303.
35. Backhauss C, Krieglstein J. Extract of kava (Piper methysticum) and its methysticin
constituents protect brain tissue against ischemic damage in rodents. European
Journal of Pharmacology, 1992, 215:265–269.
36. Backhauss C, Krieglstein J. Neuroprotectant activity of kava extract (Piper methysticum) and its methysticin constituents in vivo and in vitro. Pharmacology of Cerebral
Ischemia, 1992:501–507.
37. Seitz U et al. [3H]Monoamine uptake inhibition properties of kava pyrones. Planta
Medica, 1997, 63:548–549.
38. Baum SS, Hill R, Rommelspacher H. Effect of kava extract and individual
kavapyrones on neurotransmitter levels in the nucleus accumbens of rats. Progress
in Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 1998, 22:1105–1120.
39. Jussofie A, Schmiz A, Hiemke C. Kava pyrone-enriched extract from Piper methysticum as modulator of the GABA binding site in different regions of rat brain. Psychopharmacology, 1994, 116:469–474.
40. Schmitz D et al. Effects of methysticin on three different models of seizurelike events studied in rat hippocampal and entorhinal cortex slices. NaunynSchmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology, 1995, 351:348–355.
41. Gleitz J, Beile A, Peters T. (±)-Kavain inhibits the veratridine- and KCl-induced
increase in intracellular Ca2+ and glutamate-release of rat cerebrocortical synaptosomes. Neuropharmacology, 1996, 35:179–186.

243

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
42. Walden J et al. Effects of kawain and dihydromethysticin on field potential changes
in the hippocampus. Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry,
1997, 21:697–706.
43. Walden J et al. Actions of kavain and dihydromethysticin on ipsapirone-induced
field potential changes in the hippocampus. Human Psychopharmacology, 1997,
12:265–270.
44. Davies LP et al. Kava pyrones and resin: studies on GABAA, GABAB and benzodiazepine binding sites in rodent brain. Pharmacology and Toxicology, 1992, 71:120–126.
45. Boonen G et al. In vivo effects of the kavapyrones (+)-dihydromethysticin and
(±)-kavain on dopamine, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, serotonin, and 5hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels in striatal and cortical brain regions. Planta Medica,
1998, 64:507–510.
46. Keller F, Klohs MW. A review of the chemistry and pharmacology of the constituents
of Piper methysticum. Lloydia, 1963, 26:1–15.
47. Meyer HJ, Meyer-Burg J. Hemmung des Elektrokrampfes durch die Kawa-Pyrone
Dihydromethysticin und Dihydrokawain. Archives internationales de Pharmacodynamie
et de Thérapie, 1964, 148:97–110.
48. Kretzschmar R, Meyer HJ, Tschendorf HJ. Strychnine antagonistic potency of
pyrone compounds of the kava root (Piper methysticum Forst). Experientia, 1970,
26:283–284.
49. Gleitz J et al. Anticonvulsive action of (±)-kavain estimated from its properties on
stimulated synaptosomes and Na+ channel receptor sites. European Journal of Pharmacology, 1996, 315:89–97.
50. Gleitz J et al. Kavain inhibits non-stereospecifically veratridine-activated Na+ channels. Planta Medica, 1996, 62:580–581.
51. Magura EI et al. Kava extract ingredients, (+)-methysticin and (±)-kavain inhibit
voltage-operated Na+ channels in rat CA1 hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience, 1997,
81:345–351.
52. Kretzschmar R et al. Spasmolytische Wirksamkeit von aryl-substituierten a-Pyronen
und wässrigen Extrakten aus Piper methysticum Forst. Archives internationales de Pharmacodynamie et de Thérapie, 1969, 180:475–491.
53. Meyer HJ. Spasmolytische Effekte von Dihydromethysticin, einem Wirkstoff aus
Piper methysticum Forst. Archives internationales de Pharmacodynamie et de Thérapie, 1965,
154:449–467.
54. Buckley JP, Furgiuele AR, O’Hara MJ. Pharmacology of kava. In: Efron DH, ed.
Ethnopharmacologic search for psychoactive drugs. Washington, DC, United States Public
Health Service, 1967 (United States Public Health Service Publication No. 1645).
55. Singh YN. Effects of kava on neuromuscular transmission and muscle contractility.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1983, 7:267–276.
56. Guérin J-C, Réveillère H-P. Activité antifongique d’extraits végétaux à usage
thérapeutique. I. Étude de 41 extraits sur 9 souches fongiques. Annales pharmaceutiques françaises, 1984, 42:553–559.
57. Locher CP et al. Anti-microbial activity and anti-complement activity of extracts
obtained from selected Hawaiian medicinal plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1995,
49:23–32.
58. Bhate H et al. Orale Prämedikation mit Zubereitungen aus Piper methysticum bei
operativen Eingriffen in Epiduralanästhesie. Erfahrungsheilkunde, 1989, 6:339–345.
59. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 3rd ed. rev. Washington, DC,
American Psychiatric Association, 1987.
60. Volz HP, Hänsel R. Kava-Kava und Kavain in der Psychopharmakotherapie. Psychopharmakotherapie, 1994, 1:33–39.
61. Klimke A et al. Effectivity of Kavain in tranquilizer indication. Psychopharmacology,
1988, 96 (Suppl. 1):34.

244

Rhizoma Piperis Methystici
62. Herberg KW. Fahrtüchtigkeit nach Einnahme von Kava-Spezialextrakt WS 1490.
Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Medizin, 1991, 67:842–846.
63. Herberg KW. Zum Einfluss von Kava-Spezialextrakt WS 1490 in Kombination mit
Ethylalkohol auf sicherheitsrelevante Leistungsparameter. Blutalkohol, 1993, 30:
96–105.
64. Heinze HJ et al. Pharmacopsychological effects of oxazepam and kava extract in a
visual search paradigm assessed with event-related potentials. Pharmacopsychiatry,
1994, 27:224–230.
65. Münte TF et al. Effects of oxazepam and an extract of kava roots (Piper methysticum)
on event-related potentials in a word recognition task. Neuropsychobiology, 1993, 27:
46–53.
66. Gessner B, Cnota P. Untersuchung der Vigilanz nach Applikation von Kava-Kava
Extrakt, Diazepam oder Placebo. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1994, 15:30–37.
67. Herberg, KW. Alltagssicherheit unter Kava-Kava-Extrakt, Bromazepam und deren
Kombination. Zeitschrift für Allgemeinmedizin, 1996, 72:973–977.
68. Blumenthal M. Editorial comments. Herbalgram, 2002, 54:5.
69. Almeida JC, Grimsley EW. Coma from the health food store: interaction between
kava and alprazolam. Annals of Internal Medicine, 1996, 125:940–941.
70. Hoffmann R, Winter U. Therapeutische Möglichkeiten mit einem hochdosierten standardisierten Kava-Kava Präparat (Antares 120) bei Angsterkrankungen. V. Phytotherapie
Kongress. Bonn, 1993.
71. Norton SA, Ruze P. Kava dermopathy. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 1994, 31:89–97.
72. Ruze P. Kava-induced dermopathy: a niacin deficiency? Lancet, 1990, 335:1442–1445.
73. Siegel RK. Herbal intoxication. Psychoactive effects from herbal cigarettes, tea, and
capsules. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1976, 236:473–476.
74. Süss R, Lehmann P. Hämatogenes Kontaktekzem durch pflanzliche Medikamente
am Beispiel des Kavawurzel-Extraktes. Hautarzt, 1996, 47:459–461.
75. Jappe U et al. Sebotropic drug reaction resulting from kava-kava extract therapy: a
new entity? Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 1998, 38:104–106.
76. Mathews JD et al. Effects of the heavy usage of kava on physical health: summary
of a pilot survey in an Aboriginal community. Medical Journal of Australia, 1988, 148:
548–555.
77. Garner LF, Klinger JD. Some visual effects caused by the beverage kava. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology, 1985, 13:307–311.
78. Spillane PK, Fischer DA, Currie BJ. Neurological manifestations of kava intoxication. Medical Journal of Australia, 1997, 167:172–173.
79. Strahl S et al. Nekrotisierende Hepatitis nach Einnahme pflanzlicher Heilmittel.
Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1998, 123:1410–1414.

245

Cortex Pruni Africanae

Definition
Cortex Pruni Africanae consists of the dried bark of the trunk of Prunus africana
(Hook. f.) Kalkman (Rosaceae).

Synonyms
Pygeum africanum Hook. f. (1, 2).

Selected vernacular names
African plum tree, African prune, armaatet, bitter almond, Bitteramandel,
chati, inkhokhokho, inyangazoma-elimnyama, kiburabura, lemalan migambo,
mueri, muiru, murugutu, mutimailu, mweria, mwiritsa, nuwehout, ol-koijuk,
oromoti, red stinkwood, rooistinhout, tenduet, tendwet, twendet,
umdumizulu, umkakase, umkhakhazi, umlalume (1, 3–9).

Geographical distribution1
Found in mountain forests of equatorial Africa including Angola, Cameroon,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Republic of
Congo, South Africa, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and
Zimbabwe (2, 3, 8).

Description
An evergreen tree, usually 10–25 m high, with straight, cylindrical trunk and
dense, rounded crown. Leaves alternate, 8–12 cm long, long-stalked, simple,
elliptic, bluntly pointed at apex, with shallow crenate margins; leathery, deep
green and glossy, with midrib sharply impressed or channelled on upper surface
and strongly prominent on underside; smell of almonds when bruised. Leafstalks and young branchlets often reddish. Flowers small, white or cream, fragrant, in axillary racemes 3–8 cm long; corolla lobes up to 2 mm long. Fruits
cherry-shaped, red to purplish-brown, 8–12 mm in diameter; very bitter flesh
and bony stone. Wood pale red, with strong cyanide smell when freshly cut,
1

Owing to overexploitation and other factors, Prunus africana has been listed in Appendix II of the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (10).

246

Cortex Pruni Africanae
darkening to rich dark red or mahogany-brown on exposure to air; straightgrained and even textured, strong and elastic, very hard and very heavy (3, 8,
11).

Plant material of interest: dried trunk bark
General appearance
Red to blackish-brown, deeply square-fissured or corrugated (1, 3, 8).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: strong, characteristic almond smell (11).

Microscopic characteristics
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Powdered plant material
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

General identity tests
Macroscopic examination (3, 8).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (12).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12) and
pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12).
247

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (12) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, foreign organic matter, total ash, acid-insoluble ash, sulfated ash,
water-soluble extractive, alcohol-soluble extractive and loss on drying tests to
be established in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Qualitative and quantitative analysis for the major constituents, docosanol
and b-sitosterol, are performed by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry
(15, 16). Quantitative analysis of docosyl (E)-ferulate is performed by highperformance liquid chromatography (17).

Major chemical constituents
The purported active constituents of a lipophilic extract of Cortex Pruni
Africanae include docosanol (0.6%) and b-sitosterol (15.7%). Other major constituents include alkanols (tetracosanol [0.5%] and trans-ferulic acid esters of
docosanol and tetracosanol), fatty acids (62.3%, comprising myristic, palmitic,
linoleic, oleic, stearic, arachidic, behenic and lignoceric acids); sterols
(sitosterone [2.0%] and daucosterol) and triterpenes (ursolic acid [2.9%],
friedelin [1.4%], 2-a-hydroxyursolic acid [0.5%], epimaslinic acid [0.8%] and
maslinic acid) (2, 15–21). The structures of docosanol, tetracosanol, linoleic acid,
oleic acid, b-sitosterol, sitosterone, ursolic acid and friedelin are presented
below.

linoleic acid

H3C

oleic acid

H3C

H3C
n

CO2H
CO2H

O

R
O

docosanol
tetracosanol
docosyl (E )-ferulate
tetracosyl (E )-ferulate

248

n

R

20
22
20
22

H
H
(E )-ferulyl
(E )-ferulyl

C

OCH3
OH
(E )- ferulyl

Cortex Pruni Africanae
H3C H
H

CH3
H
CH3

H3C H

CH3

H

CH3

H

H

CH3
CH3

CH3

H
H3C

H3C
H

HO

H

H
b-sitosterol

H

H
H3C
CH3

CH3

H

HO
H
H
H3C CH3

H

CH3

H

O

sitosterone

CH3

H3C

CH 3

CH3

H

CH3
O

ursolic acid

H

H

CH3

CH3

H

CO2H

H3C

CH3
H

CH3

friedelin

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH) stages I and II, as defined by Alken (e.g. nocturia, polyuria and urinary
retention), in cases where diagnosis of prostate cancer is negative (22–34).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and traditional systems
of medicine
None.

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
As a purgative, for the treatment of stomach and intercostal pain (3, 35).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Effects on the prostate
Intraperitoneal administration of a lipophilic trunk bark extract (10 mg/kg body
weight) daily for 20 days enhanced the secretory activity of the prostate and
seminal vesicles in castrated rats, and antagonized the activity of testosterone
on these glands. However, in rats which were castrated and adrenalectomized,
the extract potentiated the effects of testosterone on both the prostate and
seminal vesicles and also increased the concentration of pituitary gonadotropins
249

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
(36). Intragastric administration of a lipophilic extract of the trunk bark to rats
(2 mg/kg body weight) daily for 20–50 days stimulated the secretory activity of
the prostate and prevented the development of prostate hyperplasia induced
by intraperitoneal injection of human prostate adenoma tissue (37). Intragastric administration of a lipophilic extract of the crude drug to rats (100 mg/kg
body weight) daily for 3 days also increased prostate secretions (38).
Hormonal activity
Intragastric administration of a lipophilic extract of the trunk bark to ovariectomized mice (150 mg/kg body weight) inhibited estrogen binding (39). Intragastric administration of a methylene chloride extract of the trunk bark to male
mice inhibited the activity of 5a-reductase (ED50 0.78 mg/ml). The same extract
also inhibited the activity of aromatase and 5a-reductase in vitro (IC50 0.98 and
0.78 mg/ml, respectively) (39). In another study, however, a lipophilic extract
only marginally inhibited the activity of 5a-reductase from human prostate
cells in vitro at a concentration of 63 mg/ml (40).
Anti-inflammatory activity
Intragastric administration of a lipophilic extract of Cortex Pruni Africanae
(400 mg/kg body weight) suppressed carrageenan-induced footpad oedema in
rats. Intraperitoneal administration of the extract to rats (100 mg/kg body
weight) also reduced the increase in vascular permeability caused by histamine
(41). A lipophilic extract of the trunk bark inhibited the production of 5-lipoxygenase metabolites, such as chemotactic leukotrienes, in human polymorphonuclear cells stimulated by the calcium ionophore A23187 (42, 43).
Antispasmodic activity
A lipophilic extract of the crude drug administered intragastrically to rats inhibited spasms of the bladder induced by electroshock, phenylephrine, adenosine
triphosphate and carbachol (44). A reduction in carbachol-induced spasms
of the bladder was observed after intragastric administration of a lipophilic
extract of the crude drug to guinea-pigs (36). Intragastric administration of a
lipophilic extract of the trunk bark to rabbits (100 mg/kg body weight) prevented the development of contractile dysfunction induced by partial obstruction of the bladder (45). A lipophilic extract of the crude drug improved the
contractility of the detrusor muscle of the bladder in old rats (46).
Inhibition of cell proliferation
A chloroform extract of the crude drug (10 mg/ml) significantly inhibited proliferation of Swiss 3T3 mouse fibroblasts induced by basic fibroblast growth
factor and epidermal growth factor in vitro (P < 0.05) (47, 48). DNA synthesis
in rat prostatic fibroblasts, induced by insulin-like growth factor, epidermal
growth factor, 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate or basic fibroblast
250

Cortex Pruni Africanae
growth factor, was inhibited in vitro by a 95% ethanol extract of the trunk bark
(IC50 12.4, 12.6, 4.5 and 7.7 mg/ml, respectively) (49).
Toxicity
In acute and chronic toxicity studies in mice and rats, no adverse reactions or
fatalities were observed after intragastric administration of a single dose of a
lipophilic extract of the trunk bark (1–6 g/kg body weight in mice and 1–8 g/kg
body weight in rats). No adverse reactions were observed in mice and rats
after chronic intragastric administration of the extract (60 and 600 mg/kg body
weight, respectively, daily for 11 months) (2).

Clinical pharmacology
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Placebo-controlled clinical trials
Eleven double-blind, placebo-controlled studies assessed the effects of an oral
lipophilic extract of Cortex Pruni Africanae in the symptomatic treatment of
717 men with mild to moderate BPH (22–28, 30, 31, 33, 34). The number of
patients in each study ranged from 14 to 255, and the dosage of the trunk bark
extract was 75–200 mg daily for at least 6 weeks. Eight studies measured
maximum urinary flow and 10 studies measured daytime and night-time
polyuria (22–26, 28, 30, 31, 33, 34). One study also included comparison with
a combination of the trunk bark extract and medroxyprogesterone acetate (34).
Seven trials reported a significant improvement in maximum urinary flow following treatment with the extract, as compared with placebo (22–26, 28, 31).
However, in one study with only a small number of patients, no beneficial urodynamic effects were seen (27). Ten of these trials also demonstrated significant improvements in the symptoms of nocturia, daytime polyuria, dysuria,
and the hesitancy and urgency of micturition, as compared with placebo
(22–26, 28, 30, 31, 33, 34).
A histological study of prostate tissue biopsies from patients with BPH
before and after treatment (75 mg extract daily for 1–3 months) showed that a
lipophilic extract of the trunk bark enhanced prostate secretion, but did not
reduce the size of the prostate (50). A lipophilic extract of the trunk bark also
restored the activity of prostate acid phosphatase and the normal levels of total
protein secretion from the prostate in patients with abnormally low levels of
secretion (51).
Comparative studies
Four double-blind studies compared oral administration of a lipophilic extract
of the crude drug and docosanol (one of the active constituents of the extract)
with an extract of Radix Urticae Urtae, sitosterin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and antibiotics (22, 52, 53). The total number of patients was 183,
with a range of 39–53 patients per study. Patients were treated with either
100 mg docosanol, 100 mg trunk bark extract or varying doses of the compara251

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
tive drugs. Improvements in postvoid residual volume, nocturia, daytime
polyuria and the urgency of micturition were seen in all treatment groups in
three studies, with the trunk bark extract appearing to be the most effective
(22, 52, 53). However, no controlled studies have yet been performed to
compare the effects of trunk bark extracts with newer agents (e.g. finasteride
or a1-receptor antagonists, such as alfuzosin) for the treatment of BPH
symptoms.
Clinical trials without controls
Fourteen clinical trials without controls demonstrated an improvement of
global outcome assessments after oral treatment with a chloroform extract of
the trunk bark in 461 men with stage I or II BPH (54–67). In four of these studies,
a total of 180 patients received 75 mg extract daily for 21 days to 3 months (54,
56, 64, 66); in the other 10 studies, a total of 281 patients were treated with
100 mg extract daily for 21 days to 3 months (55, 57–63, 65, 67). In all but three
studies (59, 63, 67), the global outcome was assessed as either improved, good,
very good or excellent in over 50% of the patients.
The results of 19 clinical trials without controls involving 849 men with BPH
(18–59 patients per study) demonstrated an objective improvement in their
symptoms following treatment with a lipophilic extract of the trunk bark (53,
68–85). Patients were treated daily with either 75 mg (116 patients), 75–100 mg
(20 patients), 100 mg (523 patients), 150 mg (42 patients) or 200 mg extract (148
patients) for 20–160 days. Improvements in nocturia, daytime polyuria,
postvoid residual volume and mean maximum urinary flow rate were observed
in over 50% of patients in 14, eight, seven and four studies, respectively. Other
symptoms such as dysuria, and hesitancy and urgency of micturition also
improved (44).
A large open-label study assessed improvements in urodynamic parameters
in 500 men with BPH after daily treatment with a lipophilic extract of the bark
for over 5 years (doses not specified). Improvements in dysuria, daytime
polyuria and nocturia were observed in over 68% of patients, and improvements in urinary flow rate and volume were reported in over 61% (32). The
greatest improvements were observed in patients with moderate symptoms,
who did not have a prominent median lobe of the prostate, and whose baseline postvoid residual volume was less than 100 ml (32, 44). An improvement
in prostate secretion was also reported, but only in the absence of prostate
infection (38).
A multicentre study without controls assessed the efficacy and safety of
treatment with a trunk bark extract (50 mg) twice daily for 2 months in 85 men
with symptoms of BPH (neither the extract nor the stage of BPH was described).
Subjective assessment of the outcomes was made using the International
Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) and the Quality of Life score (QL), and urine
flowmetry was used for objective evaluation. After treatment, the IPSS and QL
improved significantly (P < 0.001) by 40% and 31%, respectively. Nocturnal
frequency was also significantly reduced by 32% (P < 0.001) (55).
252

Cortex Pruni Africanae

Contraindications
Cortex Pruni Africanae is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants
of the Rosaceae family. It is also contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation and in children under the age of 12 years because of its effects on androgen and estrogen metabolism (39, 86).

Warnings
Cortex Pruni Africanae relieves the symptoms associated with BPH, but does
not have an effect on the size of the prostate. If symptoms worsen or do not
improve, or if blood appears in the urine or acute urinary retention occurs,
contact a physician.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A lipophilic extract of Cortex Pruni Africanae had no effect on fertility in male
rats and rabbits at doses up to 80 mg/kg body weight daily (44). No mutagenic
or clastogenic activity has been observed in vitro or in vivo (44).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications. There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Cortex
Pruni Africanae during pregnancy.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications. There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Cortex
Pruni Africanae during pregnancy.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications. There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Cortex
Pruni Africanae during lactation.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications. There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Cortex
Pruni Africanae in children.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; or drug and laboratory test interactions.

Adverse reactions
Data from clinical studies show that a lipophilic extract of Cortex Pruni
Africanae is well tolerated in humans. A few cases of minor transient gastro253

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
intestinal side-effects, such as diarrhoea, gastric pain and nausea, were reported
in two clinical trials (22, 23), and single cases of constipation, dizziness and
visual disturbance were also reported (23).

Dosage forms
Lipophilic extract of the crude drug (1, 2). Store in a cool, dry place.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 75–200 mg lipidosterolic extract of the crude drug, in divided
doses. To minimize gastrointestinal disturbances, take with food or milk.

References
1. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
2. Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Prunus africana (Hook. f) Kalkm. Fitoterapia, 1997, 68:
205–218.
3. Beentje H. Kenyan trees, shrubs and lianas. Nairobi, National Museums of Kenya,
1994.
4. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
5. Immelman WFE et al., eds. Our green heritage: the South African book of trees. Cape
Town, Tafelberg, 1973.
6. Kokwaro JO. Medicinal plants of East Africa, 2nd ed. Nairobi, Kenyan Literature
Bureau, 1993.
7. Moll E. Trees of Natal. Cape Town, University of Cape Town, 1981.
8. Van Breitenbach F. Southern Cape forests and trees. Pretoria, Government Printers for
the Department of Forestry, 1974.
9. Watt JM, Breyer-Brandwijk MG. The medicinal and poisonous plants of southern and
eastern Africa, 2nd ed. London, E & S Livingstone, 1962.
10. Cunningham M et al. Trade in Prunus africana and the implementation of CITES. Bonn,
German Federal Agency for Nature Conservation, 1997.
11. Arnold TH, De Wet BC, eds. Plants of Southern Africa: names and distribution.
Pretoria, National Botanical Institute, 1993 (Memoirs of the Botanical Survey of
South Africa, No. 62).
12. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
13. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Martinelli EM, Seraglia R, Pifferi G. Characterization of Pygeum africanum bark
extracts by HRGC with computer assistance. Journal of High Resolution Chromatography and Chromatography Communications, 1986, 9:106–110.
16. Pierini N et al. Identification and determination of N-docosanol in the bark extract
of Pygeum africanum and in patent medicines containing it. Bolletin Chimica Farmacia,
1982, 121:27–34.

254

Cortex Pruni Africanae
17. Uberti E et al. HPLC analysis of N-docosyl ferulate in Pygeum africanum extracts and
pharmaceutical formulations. Fitoterapia, 1990, 61:342–347.
18. Catalano S et al. New constituents of Prunus africana bark extract. Journal of Natural
Products, 1984, 47:910.
19. Longo R, Tira S. Constituents of Pygeum africanum bark. Planta Medica, 1981, 42:
195–203.
20. Longo R, Tira S. Steroidal and other components of Pygeum africanum bark. Il
Farmaco, 1983, 38:287–292.
21. Nieri E et al. New lignans from Prunus africana Hook. Rivista Italiana Eppos, 1996, 7:
27–31.
22. Barth H. Non-hormonal treatment of benign prostatic hypertrophy. Clinical
evaluation of the active extract of Pygeum africanum. In: Proceedings of the Symposium
on Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy, Paris, October 3 1981. Paris, 1981:45–51.
23. Bartlet A et al. Efficacy of Pygeum africanum extract in the treatment of micturitional
disorders due to benign prostatic hyperplasia. Evaluation of objective and subjective parameters. A multicentre, randomized, double-blind trial. Wiener Klinische
Wochenschrift, 1990, 102:667–673.
24. Bassi P et al. Estratto standardizzato di Pygeum africanum nel trattamento
dell’ipertrofia prostatica benigna. Studio clinico controllato versus placebo. Minerva
Urologica e Nefrologica, 1987, 39:45–50.
25. Blitz M et al. Étude contrôlée de l’efficacité d’un traitement médical sur des sujets
consultant pour la premiére fois pour un adénome de la prostate. Lyon méditerranée
médical, 1985, 21:11.
26. Bongi G. Il Tadenan nella terapia dell’adenoma prostatico. Studio anatomo-clinico.
Minerva Urologica, 1972, 24:129–139.
27. Donkervoort T et al. A clinical and urodynamic study of Tadenan in the treatment
of benign prostatic hypertrophy. European Urology, 1977, 3:218–225.
28. Dufour B et al. Traitement symptomatique de l’adénome prostatique. Étude
clinique controlée des effets de l’extrait de Pygeum africanum. Gazette médicale de
France, 1983, 90:2338–2340.
29. Frasseto G et al. Studio sull’efficacia e sulla tollerabilità del Tadenan 50 in pazienti
affetti da ipertrofia prostatica. Il Progresso Medico (Rome), 1986, 42:49–53.
30. Giacobini S et al. Valutazione clinica e morfo-funzionale del trattamento a doppio
cieco con placebo, Tadenan 50 e Tadenan 50 associato a Farlutal nei pazienti con
ipertrofia prostatica benigna. Andrologia Medica Italiana, 1986, 6:1–10.
31. Maver A. Terapia medica dell’ipertrofia fibro-adenomatosa della prostata mediante
una nuova sostanza vegetale. Minerva Medica, 1972, 63:2126–2136.
32. Moya-Prats PP et al. Valoración estadística de 500 pacients con hipertrofia
prostática benigna, tratados con Pygeum africanum, y valorados estadísticamente
desde el punto de vista clínico y flujométrico. Urodinámica Aplicada, 1989, 1:150–
155.
33. Ranno S et al. Efficacia e tollerabilità del trattamento dell’adenoma prostatico con
Tadenan 50. Progresso Medico (Rome), 1986, 42:165–169.
34. Rizzo M et al. Terapia medica dell’adenoma della prostata: valutazione clinica comparativa tra estratto di Pygeum africanum ad alte dosi e placebo. Farmacia Terapia,
1985, 2:105–110.
35. Hutchings A. Zulu medicinal plants: an inventory. Pietermaritzburg, Natal University
Press, 1996.
36. Thiebolt L, Grizard G, Boucher D. Étude du V1326, principe actif d’un extrait
d’écorce de plante Africaine Pygeum africanum sur l’axe hypophyso-génito surrénalien du rat. Thérapie, 1977, 32:99–110.
37. Thiebolt L et al. Action préventive et curative d’un extrait d’écorce de plante
africaine Pygeum africanum sur l’adénome prostatique expérimentale chez le rat.
Thérapie, 1971, 26:575.

255

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
38. Clavert A et al. Effets d’un extrait d’écorce de Pygeum africanum (V.1326) sur les
sécrétions prostatiques du rat et de l’homme. Annales d’Urologie, 1986, 20:341–
343.
39. Hartmann RW, Mark M, Soldati F. Inhibition of 5a-reductase and aromatase by PHL00801 (Prostatonin®), a combination of PY 102 (Pygeum africanum) and UR 102
(Urtica dioica) extracts. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:121–128.
40. Rhodes L et al. Comparison of finasteride (Proscar®), a 5a-reductase inhibitor, and
various commercial plant extracts in in vitro and in vivo 5a-reductase inhibition.
The Prostate, 1993, 22:43–51.
41. Marconi M et al. Anti-inflammatory action of Pygeum africanum extract in the rat.
Farmacia Terapia, 1986, 3:135–138.
42. Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of Pygeum africanum extract on A23187-stimulated
production of lipoxygenase metabolites from human polymorphonuclear cells.
Journal of Lipid Mediators and Cell Signalling, 1994, 9:285–290.
43. Sidoti C et al. Inhibitory effect of Pygeum africanum extract (Tadenan) on A23187stimulated lipoxygenase metabolite production from human polymorphonuclear
cells. The Pharmacologist, 1993, 35:196.
44. Andro MC, Riffaud JP. Pygeum africanum extract for the treatment of patients with
benign prostatic hyperplasia: a review of 25 years of published experience. Current
Therapeutic Research, 1995, 56:796–817.
45. Lowe FC, Ku JC. Phytotherapy in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: a
critical review. Urology, 1996, 48:12–20.
46. Riffaud JP, Lacolle JY. Effects of Tadenan on the detrusor smooth muscle of young
and old rats. European Urology, 1990, 18:309–312.
47. Paubert-Braquet M et al. Pygeum africanum extract (Tadenan) inhibits b-FGF- and
EGF-induced proliferation of 3T3 fibroblasts. The Pharmacologist, 1993, 35:173.
48. Paubert-Braquet M et al. L’extrait de Pygeum africanum (Tadenan®) inhibe la prolifération des fibroblastes murins 3T3 induite par le basic Fibroblast Growth Factor.
Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy, 1994, 48:43–47.
49. Yablonsky F et al. Antiproliferative effect of Pygeum africanum extract on rat prostatic fibroblasts. Journal of Urology, 1997, 157:2381–2387.
50. Doremieux J, Masson J-C, Bollack C. Adénome de la prostate. Effets cliniques et
modifications histologiques apportés par un complexe lipido-stérolique extrait de
Pygeum africanum. Journal de Médicine de Strasbourg, 1973, 4:252–257.
51. Luchetta G et al. Reactivation of the secretion from the prostatic gland in cases of
reduced fertility. Biological study of the seminal fluid modifications. Urology International, 1984, 39:222–224.
52. Gagliardi V et al. Terapia medica dell’ipertrofia prostatica. Sperimentazione
clinica controllata. Archivio Italiano di Urologia, Nefrologia, Andrologia, 1983, 55:51–
69.
53. Rigatti T et al. Valutazione clinica e ecografica dell’efficacia terapeutica del Tadenan
nell’ipertrofia prostatica. Attidella Academia Medica Lombarda, 1985, 40:1–6.
54. Investigation terapeutica con “Pronitol”. Clinica Rural, 1973, 8:56–62.
55. Breza H et al. Efficacy and acceptability of Tadenan (Pygeum africanum extract) in the
treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH): a multicentre trial in central Europe.
Current Medical Research and Opinion, 1998, 14:127–139.
56. Diz M. Pygeum africanum in urologia. New England Journal of Medicine (Spanish
edition), 1973, 7:35–38.
57. Grasset D. Expérimentation clinique du Tadenan dans le traitement de l’adénome
prostatique. Médecine practicienne, 1974, 537:87–91.
58. Greiner C. Résultats cliniques de l’expérimentation du Tadenan. Médecine interne,
1970, 5:10–12.
59. Grévy A, Favre JP. Nouvelle thérapeutique dans les troubles mictionnels d’origine
prostatique ou cervicale chez l’homme. Médecine interne, 1970, 5:3–5.

256

Cortex Pruni Africanae
60. Guillaud-Vallée Y. Expérimentation clinique du V1326 (Tadenan). Médecine interne,
1970, 5:7–9.
61. Guillemin P. Essai clinique du V1326, ou Tadenan, vis-à-vis de l’adénome prostatique. Médecine practicienne, 1973, 8:333–334.
62. Huet JA. Les affections de la prostate sujétion du troisième age. Médecine interne,
1970, 5:405–408.
63. Lange J, Muret P. Expérimentation clinique du V1326 dans les troubles prostatiques.
Bordeaux médical, 1970, 11:2807–2809.
64. Lhez A, Leguevague G. Essai clinique d’un nouveau complexe lipido-stérolique
d’origine végétale dans le traitement le l’adénome prostatique. Vie médicine,
1970, 2:1–4.
65. Martinez-Pineiro JA, Armero H. Resultados de la terapeutica de las affecciones prostaticas con V1326. New England Journal of Medicine (Spanish edition), 1973, 7:29–34.
66. Robineau Y, Pelissier E. Applications thérapeutiques du Pygeum africanum (Tadenan).
Chez 50 malades de notre service ayant consulté pour des troubles urinaires en relation directe avec un adénome prostatique. Diagnostics, 1976, 175:115–120.
67. Rometti A. Traitement médicale de l’adénome prostatique par le V13–26. Provence
médicale, 1970, 38:49–51.
68. Fréquence des symptômes fonctionnels de l’adénome de la prostate au stade non
chirurgical. Gazette médicale, 1985, 92:111–113.
69. Arena D et al. Efficacia e tollerabilità dell’estratto di Pygeum africanum in pazienti
affeti da adenoma della prostata. Progresso Medico (Rome), 1987, 43:185–187.
70. Borówka A et al. Wyniki leczenia Tadenanem chorych z gruczolakiem stercza.
Urologia Polska, 1978, 31:321–326.
71. Carani C et al. Valutazione urologica e sessuologica del trattamento medica della
patologia prostatica benigna mediante Pygeum africanum ad alte dosi. Archivio Italiano
di Urologia, Nefrologia, Andrologia, 1991, 63:341–345.
72. Carretero-Gonzalez P et al. Experimentacion clinica con el Pronitol en el adenoma
prostatico. New England Journal of Medicine (Spanish edition), 1973, 7:40–42.
73. Colpi G, Farina U. Studio dell’attivita dell’estratto cloroformico di corteccia di
Pygeum africanum nella terapia della sindrome ostruttiva ureterale da prostatopatia
non cancerosa. Urologia, 1976, 43:441–448.
74. De Paula F, Ferdinandi V, Florio A. Confronto tra due diversi livelli posologici di
Pygeum africanum nel trattamento dell’ipertrofia prostatica. Rassegna di Urologia e
Nefrologia, 1987, 25:1–8.
75. Durval A. Sull’impiegio di un nuovo farmaco nella terapia dell’adenoma prostatico:
il Tadenan. Minerva Urologica, 1970, 22:106–111.
76. Esquivel EL. Clinical experience with the symptomatic treatment of benign prostate
hyperplasia with Pygeum africanum extract. Journal of the American Medical Association,
1988, 4 (Suppl. 11):1–8.
77. Fava C et al. Valutazione clinica, ecografica e uroflussimetrica dell’afficacia terapeutica dell’estratto di Pygeum africanum ad alte dosi. Farmacia Terapia, 1987, 4:99–101.
78. Gallizia F, Gallizia G. Trattamento medico dell’ipertrofia prostatica con un nuovo
principio fitoterapico. Recentia Medica, 1970, 9:128–136.
79. Hallemans E. Expérimentation clinique du Tadenan dans l’adénome prostatique.
Médecine interne, 1970, 5:7–9.
80. Legramandi C et al. Importanza del Pygeum africanum nel trattamento delle
prostatiti croniche abatteriche. Gazzetta Medica Italiana Archivo per Scienze Medicale,
1984, 143:73–76.
81. Mattei FM, Acconci A. Efficacia e tollerabilità del Pygeum africanum ad alte
dosi nella terapia medica dell’adenoma prostatico. Farmacia Terapia, 1988, 5:44–
46.
82. Pansadoro V, Benincasa A. Ipertrofia prostatica: resultati della terapia con un estratto
di Pygeum africanum (Tadenan). Recentia Medica, 1972, 9:128–136.

257

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
83. Thomas J-P, Rouffilange F. Action du Tadenan sur l’adénome prostatique. Revue
Internationale des Services de Santé des Armées de Terre, de Mer et de l’Air, 1970, 43:43–
45.
84. Viollet G. Expérimentation clinique d’un nouveau traitement de l’adénome prostatique. Vie médicale, 1970, 23:3457–3458.
85. Wemau L et al. Le Tadenan dans l’adénome prostatique. Vie médicale, 1970, 4:
585–588.
86. Mathé G et al. The so-called phyto-estrogenic action of Pygeum africanum extract.
Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy, 1995, 49:339–340.

258

Cortex Rhamni Purshianae

Definition
Cortex Rhamni Purshianae consists of the dried bark of Rhamnus purshiana D.C.
(Rhamnaceae) (1–5). Cascara (2) and Cascara Sagrada (5) are also official names
of the drug.

Synonyms
Frangula purshiana (D.C.) A. Gray ex J.C. Cooper (3, 5), Rhamnus purshianus D.C.
(4). Although the species name in the British, French, German and European
pharmacopoeias is given as purshianus, the correct species name is purshiana
according to the International code of botanical nomenclature (Tokyo code) (4; J.
Morley, personal communication, 1998).

Selected vernacular names
Amerikanischen Faulbaum, bear wood, bitter bark, cascara bark, cascararinde,
chittem bark, cortex cascara sagradae, écorce de cascara, purshiana bark,
quishron moquaddas, Rhamnus, sacred bark (1, 6–8).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to south-western Canada and the Pacific north-west of the United
States of America (8–10).

Description
A tree, 4–10 m high, with reddish-brown bark and hairy twigs. Leaves petiolate, elliptical, acuminate, serrulate, or sometimes entire, with 10–15 pairs of
veins, dull green upper surface and pubescent underside. Inflorescence an axillary umbellate cyme of small greenish flowers. Fruit a turbinate, purplish-black
drupe, about 8 mm long, composed of 3 indehiscent cocci (8).

Plant material of interest: dried bark
The fresh bark contains free anthrones and must be dried for at least 1 year or
artificially aged by heat or aeration before therapeutic use (1, 5, 8).
259

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

General appearance
Occurs in quills, slightly channelled or nearly flat pieces; usually 1–5 mm thick,
usually varying greatly in length (up to 20 cm) and width (up to 2 cm). Outer
surface brown, purplish-brown or brownish-red, usually more or less completely covered by a whitish coat of lichens, epiphytic moss and foliaceous
liverwort; shows occasional lenticels that are orientated transversally. Inner
surface light yellow to reddish-brown or almost black, with fine longitudinal
striations; turns red when treated with dilute alkali (Bornträger’s test). Fracture
short and granular in outer part and somewhat fibrous in the inner part
(1, 3, 5).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faint, but characteristic; taste: bitter, nauseous and persistent (1, 11).

Microscopic characteristics
Cork frequently bearing dense masses of lichen tissues, and formed of 10 or
more rows of small, flattened, thin-walled cells with yellowish-brown contents.
Cortex narrow, yellowish-grey, consisting of a few layers of collenchyma and
several layers of parenchyma, containing starch granules and scattered cluster
crystals of calcium oxalate; showing numerous scattered, bright, ovoid groups
of sclereids, usually encircled by cells containing prismatic crystals of calcium
oxalate. Phloem brownish-yellow, traversed by numerous wavy medullary rays
(1–5 cells wide and 15–25 cells deep); consists of alternating bands of lignified
fibres, surrounded by crystal sheath containing prismatic crystals of calcium
oxalate, and of soft sieve tissue and parenchyma with brown walls; contains scattered cluster crystals of calcium oxalate and starch grains; each fibre
8–15 mm in diameter. Groups of sclereids also found in outer part of phloem;
sclereids possess thick, stratified, pitted walls. Parenchyma may contain yellow
substance which turns crimson with dilute alkali (Bornträger’s test) (1, 5).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-brown to dusky yellowish-orange. Bundles of partly lignified
phloem fibres accompanied by crystal sheaths containing prismatic crystals of
calcium oxalate; groups of sclereids accompanied by crystal sheaths; cluster
crystals of calcium oxalate, 5–20 mm, occasionally up to 45 mm, in diameter;
some parenchymatous cells contain yellow substance which turns crimson
when treated with dilute alkali (Bornträger’s test); cork cells and frequently
epiphytes—latter may be liverworts (entire or in fragments, having a lamina
one cell thick without a midrib and composed of isodiametric cells) or mosses
(having a lamina 1 cell thick composed of elongated cells and possessing
a midrib several cells thick); starch grains spheroid, up to 8 mm in diameter
(1, 3, 5).

260

Cortex Rhamni Purshianae

General identity tests
Macroscopic, microscopic and microchemical (Bornträger’s test) examinations
(1, 3, 5) and thin-layer chromatography for characteristic hydroxyanthracene
glycosides (3, 12).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (13).

Foreign matter
Not more than 1% (3).

Total ash
Not more than 7% (1, 3).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 23% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (14). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (14), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13) and
pesticide residues (15).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (13).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (13) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, acid-insoluble ash, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests
to be established in accordance with national requirements.

261

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 8.0% hydroxyanthracene glycosides of which not less
than 60% consists of cascarosides, both calculated as cascaroside A. Quantitative analysis is performed by spectrophotometry at 515 nm (3, 5). A highperformance liquid chromatography method for the quantitative analysis of
cascarosides has been reported (16).

Major chemical constituents
The active constituents are hydroxyanthracene glycosides (6–9%). Of these,
70–90% are C-10 glycosides, with the 8-O-glycosides, aloins A and B, and
11-desoxyaloins A and B (chrysaloins A and B) accounting for 10–30%. The
diastereoisomeric pairs, cascarosides A and B and cascarosides C and D and
cascarosides E and F constitute 60–70% of the total O-glycosides. Other major
hydroxyanthracene glycosides (10–20%) include the hydroxyanthraquinones,
chrysophanol-8-O-glucoside and aloe-emodin-8-O-glucoside (7, 17–19).
In the fresh bark, anthraquinones are present in the reduced form, and
are converted by oxidation from their corresponding parent anthraquinone
glycosides during drying and storage (10). The structures of the major
anthracene glycosides are presented below.
R8

O

O

OH

X

R6
Y

X

R3

HO
O
OH

Glc =
HO

OH

Y

R3

R6

R8
H

aloin A

Glc

H

OH

H

aloin B

H

Glc

OH

H

H

cascaroside A

Glc

H

OH

H

Glc

cascaroside B

H

Glc

OH

H

Glc

cascaroside C

Glc

H

H

H

Glc

cascaroside D

H

Glc

H

H

Glc

cascaroside E

Glc

H

H

OH

Glc

cascaroside F

H

Glc

H

OH

Glc

chrysaloin A

Glc

H

H

H

H

chrysaloin B

H

Glc

H

H

H

b-D-glucopyranosyl

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Short-term treatment of occasional constipation (8, 17, 20, 21).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As a cathartic (1).
262

Cortex Rhamni Purshianae

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Internally for treatment of diabetes and externally for skin irritations (6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Laxative effects
The laxative effects of Cortex Rhamni Purshianae are due primarily to the
anthraquinone glycosides and cascarosides A–D (7, 22). After oral administration of Cortex Rhamni Purshianae, the hydroxyanthracene glycosides are not
absorbed in the upper intestine, but are hydrolysed in the colon by intestinal
bacteria to form the pharmacologically active metabolites. These metabolites
are partially absorbed in the colon and act as a stimulant and irritant to the gastrointestinal tract, as does senna (21, 23–25). The mechanism of action, similar
to that of senna, is twofold. Firstly, there is stimulation of colonic motility,
resulting in increased propulsion and accelerated transit of faeces through the
colon (which reduces fluid absorption from the faecal mass). Secondly, there is
an increase in paracellular permeability across the colonic mucosa, probably
due to inhibition of sodium/potassium-transporting adenosine triphosphatase
or inhibition of chloride channels (23, 26). The increased permeability results
in increased water content in the colon (21, 26).
The laxative effect of Cortex Rhamni Purshianae is not generally observed
until 6–8 hours after oral administration. Hydroxyanthracene glycosides are
excreted predominantly in the faeces but are also excreted to some extent in
urine, producing an orange colour; anthrones and anthranols will also pass into
breast milk (23).
Toxicity and overdose
As with other anthraquinone laxatives, the major symptoms of overdose are
intestinal pain and severe diarrhoea with consequent loss of fluid and electrolytes (27). Treatment of overdoses should be supportive with generous
amounts of fluid. Electrolyte levels should be monitored, particularly those of
potassium. This is especially important in children and the elderly (27).

Clinical pharmacology
None.

Contraindications
Cortex Rhamni Purshianae should not be administered to patients with intestinal obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflammatory diseases of the colon (such
as ulcerative colitis, irritable bowel syndrome, Crohn disease), appendicitis,
263

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
severe dehydration with water and electrolyte depletion, or chronic constipation (20, 24, 27). As with other stimulant laxatives, Cortex Rhamni Purshianae is contraindicated in patients with cramps, colic, haemorrhoids, nephritis
or any symptoms of undiagnosed abdominal disorders such as pain, nausea or
vomiting (27). Owing to the pronounced action on the large intestine and insufficient toxicological investigations, Cortex Rhamni Purshianae and other
anthranoid laxatives should not be administered to pregnant women (28, 29).
As anthranoid metabolites may appear in breast milk, Cortex Rhamni Purshianae should not be used during lactation, since there are insufficient data to
assess potential pharmacological effects in the breastfed infant (29). Use of
Cortex Rhamni Purshianae in children under 10 years is contraindicated (20).

Warnings
Products containing Cortex Rhamni Purshianae should only be used if no effect
can be obtained through a change of diet or by the use of bulk-forming laxatives. Patients should also be warned that certain constituents of the bark are
excreted by the kidney and may colour the urine orange, which is harmless.
Cortex Rhamni Purshianae and other stimulant laxatives should not be used in
patients with abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting. The use of stimulant laxatives for longer than 2 weeks requires medical supervision. Rectal bleeding or
failure to have a bowel movement after taking a laxative may indicate a serious
condition. Chronic use may result in aggravation of constipation with laxative
dependence, a need for increased dosages and disturbances of water and electrolyte balance (e.g. hypokalaemia). Chronic use may also lead to colonic
dysfunction (atonicity) and melanotic pigmentation of the colonic mucosa
(pseudomelanosis coli), which is harmless. Laxative abuse resulting in diarrhoea
and consequent fluid and electrolyte losses (mainly of potassium) may cause
albuminuria, haematuria, and cardiac and neuromuscular dysfunction. Neuromuscular dysfunction may arise particularly in the case of concomitant use of
cardiotonic glycosides (e.g. digoxin, digitalis or strophanthin), diuretics, corticosteroids or liquorice root (27).

Precautions
General
Cortex Rhamni Purshianae and other laxatives containing anthraquinone
glycosides should not be used continuously for longer than 1–2 weeks, because
of the risk of electrolyte imbalance (27).

Drug interactions
Increased intestinal transit time may result in reduced absorption of orally
administered drugs (30). Electrolyte imbalances, such as hypokalaemia, may
potentiate the effects of cardiotonic glycosides (e.g. digoxin, digitalis or
264

Cortex Rhamni Purshianae
strophanthin). Hypokalaemia resulting from long-term laxative abuse can also
potentiate the effects of antiarrhythmic drugs (e.g. quinidine) that change sinus
rhythm by affecting potassium channels. Hypokalaemia caused by drugs such
as thiazide diuretics, adrenocorticosteroids or liquorice root may be enhanced,
and electrolyte imbalance may be aggravated (21).

Drug and laboratory test interactions
Anthranoid metabolites may not be detectable in faeces or urine by standard
methods. Thus faecal excretion measurements may not be reliable (30). Urinary
excretion of certain anthranoid metabolites may cause discoloration of the
urine which is not clinically relevant, but may cause false-positives in urinary
urobilinogen tests and in estrogen measurements using the Kober procedure
(31).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Although chronic use of anthranoid-containing laxatives has been hypothesized to play a role in colorectal cancer, no causal relationship has been demonstrated (32–35).
No specific data on carcinogenicity or mutagenicity are available for Cortex
Rhamni Purshianae or the cascarosides. Data for aloin derived from aloe indicate no genotoxic risk. Emodin derived from aloe showed both positive and
negative results in vitro, but was negative in vivo. Emodin was mutagenic in
the Salmonella/microsome assay, but gave inconsistent results in gene mutation
assays (V 79). It showed positive results in the test for unscheduled DNA synthesis with primary rat hepatocytes, but negative results in the sister chromatid exchange assay (20).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications. Administration of aloin A to rats at doses up to 200 mg/kg
body weight had no embryotoxic, teratogenic or fetotoxic effects (36).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Adverse reactions
Single doses of Cortex Rhamni Purshianae may result in cramp-like discomfort
of the gastrointestinal tract, which may require a reduction of dosage (21).
265

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Overdose can lead to colicky abdominal spasms and pain, as well as the
formation of thin, watery stools.
Long-term laxative abuse may lead to electrolyte imbalance (hypokalaemia
and hypocalcaemia), metabolic acidosis, malabsorption of nutrients, weight
loss, albuminuria and haematuria (37, 38). Weakness and orthostatic hypotension may be exacerbated in elderly patients when stimulant laxatives are repeatedly used. Secondary aldosteronism may occur after prolonged use due to renal
tubular damage. Steatorrhoea and protein-losing gastroenteropathy with
hypoalbuminaemia have also been reported after long-term laxative abuse (39).
Pseudomelanosis coli has been observed in individuals taking anthraquinone
laxatives for extended time periods (27, 38). The pigmentation is harmless and
usually reversible within 4–12 months after the drug is discontinued (38). Conflicting data exist on other toxic effects after long-term use such as intestinalneuronal damage (38, 40). In incontinent patients using anthranoid laxatives,
prolonged exposure of the skin to faeces may cause skin damage (41).
Use of the fresh bark of Rhamnus purshiana may cause severe vomiting, with
possible abdominal spasms (23). One case of occupational asthma and rhinitis
has been reported (42).

Dosage forms
Finely cut crude drug, powder, dried extracts, extract (5), fluidextract (5), other
liquid and solid preparations (5, 7). Store in a tightly sealed, light-resistant
container (1, 3).

Posology
The correct dosage for the treatment of occasional constipation is the smallest
dosage necessary to maintain a soft stool. Daily dosage: 0.3–1.0 g crude drug in
a single dose (20); all preparations standardized to contain 20–30 mg of
hydroxyanthracene derivatives calculated as cascaroside A; taken at bedtime,
or in two divided doses, one in the morning and one at bedtime (20, 21).

References
1. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
2. British pharmacopoeia. Vol. I (International edition and addendum). London, Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1995.
3. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
4. Greuter W et al., eds. International code of botanical nomenclature (Tokyo code).
Konigstein, Koeltz Scientific, 1994.
5. The United States pharmacopeia 24: national formulary 19. Rockville, MD, The United
States Pharmacopeia Convention, 1996.
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, July 8, 1998 production (an online database available directly through
the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network
[STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).

266

Cortex Rhamni Purshianae
7. Bisset NR, ed. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
1994:463–469.
8. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
9. Gathercoal EN, Wirth EH. Pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, PA, Lea & Febiger, 1947.
10. Tyler VE, Brady LR, Robbers JE, eds. Pharmacognosy, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Lea &
Febiger, 1988:62–63.
11. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
12. Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant drug analysis, 2nd ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1996.
13. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
14. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
15. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
16. De Witte P, Cuveele J, Lemli J. Determination of bicascarosides in cascara fluid
extract by high-performance liquid chromatography. Journal of Liquid Chromatography, 1991, 14:2201–2206.
17. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
18. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
19. Westendorf J. Anthranoid derivatives—Rhamnus species. In: De Smet PAGM et al.,
eds. Adverse effects of herbal drugs. Vol. 2. Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
20. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 5. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1997.
21. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin,
TX, American Botanical Council, 1998.
22. Leung AY. Cascara sagrada—new standards are needed. Drug and Cosmetic Industry,
1977, 12:42–44, 143–145.
23. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Bournemouth, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992.
24. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 30th ed. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
25. WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Vol. 1. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1999:241–258.
26. De Witte P. Metabolism and pharmacokinetics of the anthranoids. Pharmacology
1993, 47 (Suppl. 1):86–97.
27. Brunton LL. Agents affecting gastrointestinal water flux and motility, emesis and
antiemetics, bile acids and pancreatic enzymes. In: Goodman LS et al., eds. Goodman
and Gilman’s: the pharmacological basis of therapeutics, 9th ed. New York, NY, McGrawHill, 1996:917–936.
28. Lewis JH, Weingold AB. The use of gastrointestinal drugs during pregnancy and
lactation. American Journal of Gastroenterology, 1985, 80:912–923.
29. Physician’s desk reference. Montvale, NJ, Medical Economics, 1998.
30. American Hospital Formulary Service. Bethesda, MD, American Society of Hospital
Pharmacists, 1990.
31. The United States pharmacopeia: dispensing information. Rockville, MD, The United
States Pharmacopeia Convention, 1992.
32. Loew D. Pseudomelanosis coli durch Anthranoide. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1994,
16:312–318.
33. Patel PM et al. Anthraquinone laxatives and human cancer. Postgraduate Medical
Journal, 1989, 65:216–217.
34. Siegers CP. Anthranoid laxatives and colorectal cancer. Trends in the Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 1992, 13:229–231.
35. Siegers CP et al. Anthranoid laxative abuse—a risk for colorectal cancer? Gut, 1993,
34:1099–1101.

267

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
36. Bangel E et al. Tierexperimentelle pharmakologische Untersuchungen zur Frage der
abortiven und teratogenen Wirkung sowie zur Hyperämie von Aloe. SteinerInformationdienst, 1975, 4:1025.
37. Godding EW. Therapeutics of laxative agents with special reference to the
anthraquinones. Pharmacology, 1976, 14 (Suppl. 1):78–101.
38. Muller-Lissner SA. Adverse effects of laxatives: facts and fiction. Pharmacology, 1993,
47 (Suppl. 1):138–145.
39. Heizer WD et al. Protein-losing gastroenteropathy and malabsorption associated
with factitious diarrhoea. Annals of Internal Medicine, 1968, 68:839–852.
40. Kune GA. Laxative use not a risk for colorectal cancer: data from the Melbourne
colorectal cancer study. Zeitschrift für Gastroenterologie, 1993, 31:140–143.
41. Helwig H, Mund P. Akute Hautschädigung durch “X-Prep”. Monatsschrift Kinderheilkunde, 1986, 134:164.
42. Giavina-Bianchi PF et al. Occupational respiratory allergic disease induced by
Passiflora alata and Rhamnus purshiana. Annals of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, 1997,
79:449–454.

268

Flos Sambuci

Definition
Flos Sambuci consists of the dried flowers of Sambucus nigra L. (Caprifoliaceae)
(1–3).

Synonyms
Sambucus arborescens Gilib., S. medullina Gilib., S. vulgaris Lam. (4).

Selected vernacular names
Aalhornblüten, aghti, agti, American elder bailasan, black elder, bodzavirág,
bombardie, boumbardelia, boumbardier, bourtree flower, couloubrignier,
elderberry, elder flowers, European elder, fiore di sambuco, fleurs de sureau,
Fliederblüten, flor de sabugeiro, flores de sauco, flores sambuci, flos sambuci
nigra, Holderblüten, Hollerblüten, Holunderblüten, Hüschenblumen, kabiu
sabugah, Kalikenblumen, Khaman kabiv sabubah, okkez sidi musa, patlanguc,
petadou, sabugeiro, sahuquier, sahus sambequie, sambuc, sambuco, sammuch,
sammuco, sauci, saucio, sauco, sauguer, seic, seiyouniwatoko, sultanotu,
sureau, sureau noir, sweet elder (4–8).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to North Africa, North America, western and central Asia and
Europe (6, 7).

Description
A shrub growing in moist soil with stems up to 4 m high; contains abundant
white pith. Leaves imparipinnate with 5–11 oblong, glabrous leaflets, the lower
leaves often 3-lobed. Inflorescence a flat compound cyme. Flowers small, urnshaped, white, each with 5 minute calyx lobes; corolla 5-cleft gamopetalous, 5
stamens and a tricarpellate pistil with 3 stigmas. Fruits black-purple, edible,
berry-like drupes (6).

Plant material of interest: dried flowers
General appearance
Inflorescence a flat compound cyme. Flowers white, up to 5 mm in diameter,
has 3 small bracts (visible with a hand lens) and may have a peduncle. Calyx
269

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
minute, 5-lobed; corolla light yellow, with 5 broadly oval petals fused at their
bases into a tube, 5 yellow stamens with short filaments and lemon-yellow
anthers, and a trilocular inferior ovary; ovary bears a short style with 3 obtuse
stigmata; filaments of the 5 stamens alternate with the petals. Corolla often isolated or fused to base of the stamens (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: strong, characteristic, aromatic; taste: mucilaginous, sweet but slightly
bitter (1, 9).

Microscopic characteristics
Cells of upper epidermis of sepals polygonal with faintly striated cuticle; cells
of lower epidermis sinuous-walled with strongly striated cuticle and scattered,
rounded, anomocytic stomata; unicellular marginal teeth rounded at the apex
occur in the basal region of sepal. Cells of upper epidermis of petals polygonal
with slightly thickened, beaded walls and striated cuticle; cells of lower epidermis distinctly sinuous with large, rounded, anomocytic stomata. Numerous
small globules of essential oil in the epidermis of sepals and petals. Mesophyll
of sepals and petals contains idioblasts of numerous small, sandy crystals of
calcium oxalate. Fibrous layer of anthers with characteristic thickening and
beading on walls; pollen grains subspherical, 17–24 mm in diameter, with
smooth exine, 3 distinct pores and 3 furrows (1).

Powdered plant material
Greenish-yellow. Numerous spherical, sometimes ellipsoidal, pollen grains up
to 30 mm in diameter, with 3 germinal pores and very finely pitted exine; calyx
epidermal cells with a striated cuticle and occasional unicellular marginal teeth
from basal region; corolla fragments with numerous small globules of essential
oil; cells of corolla upper epidermis with slightly thickened, beaded walls and
striated cuticle; mesophyll cells of sepals and petals with idioblasts containing
numerous sandy crystals of calcium oxalate (2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, and thin-layer chromatography for
constituent phenolic acids and flavonoids (2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (10).
270

Flos Sambuci

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 8% fragments of coarse pedicels and other foreign matter; not
more than 15% discoloured, brown flowers (2).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1, 2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 25% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (11). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (11) and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10) and
pesticide residues (12).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (10).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (10) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.80% flavonoids, calculated as isoquercitrin, as determined by spectrophotometry at 425 nm (2).

Major chemical constituents
The major characteristic constituents (up to 3.0%) are the flavonoids
(kaempferol, astragalin, quercetin, rutin, isoquercitrin, hyperoside). Other
271

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
major secondary metabolites include about 1% triterpenes (a- and b-amyrin,
ursolic acid, oleanolic acid), about 1% sterols (b-sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol), about 3% phenolic acids and their corresponding glycosides (chlorogenic, ferulic, caffeic and p-coumaric acids), and up to 0.15% essential oil (4, 5,
7, 13). The structures of the representative major constituents are presented
below.
OH
OH
HO

O

O
OH

O

quercetin

X = H

isoquercitrin

X = Glcf

rutin

X = Rhap-(1

X

OH
OH
HO
HO
HH
Glcf ==
Glcf

6)-Glcp

HO

O
O
OH
OH

Rhap-(1

6)-Glcp =

O

O

CH3

O
OH

HO

HO
HO

OH
OH

OH

β-D-glucofuranosyl

a-amyrin

R = CH3

ursolic acid R = CO2H
CH3
H
HO

H

O-6-deoxy-α-L-mannopyranosyl-(1

H
H3C
CH3

H

6)-b-D-glucopyranosyl

CH3
HO
O H

H

O

R

CH3

H OH

H

CO2H
OH

HO
OH

H
H3C CH3

chlorogenic acid

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As a diaphoretic for treatment of fever and chills, and as an expectorant for
treatment of mild inflammation of the upper respiratory tract. Also for symptomatic treatment of the common cold (1, 7, 14).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of conjunctivitis, constipation, diabetes, diarrhoea, dry skin, headaches and rheumatism (5, 13, 15).
272

Flos Sambuci

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-inflammatory activity
An 80% ethanol extract of Flos Sambuci had moderate anti-inflammatory
activity in rats: it inhibited carrageenan-induced footpad oedema by 27%. The
extract was administered intragastrically (100 mg/kg body weight) 1 hour prior
to administration of carrageenan. The control drug, indometacin (5 mg/kg body
weight) inhibited carrageenan-induced footpad oedema by 45% (16). Intraperitoneal administration of an unsaponifiable fraction of the flowers to mice
moderately enhanced phagocytosis at a dose of 0.5 ml/animal (17). A 100%
methanol extract of the flowers inhibited the biosynthesis of the inflammatory
cytokines interleukin-1a, interleukin-1b and tumour necrosis factor-a at a concentration of 30 mg/ml in human peripheral mononuclear cells in vitro (18).
Diuretic activity
Intragastric administration of an infusion of the flowers (20 ml/kg body weight)
or of a potassium- and flavonoid-rich extract of the flowers had a diuretic effect
in rats which was greater than that observed with theophylline (5 mg/kg body
weight) (19).

Clinical pharmacology
Diaphoretic activity
Flos Sambuci is reported to increase the response of the sweat glands to heat
stimuli (7, 20, 21), and increase diaphoresis in healthy subjects (7, 21).

Contraindications
No information available.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; carcinogenesis, mutagenesis,
impairment of fertility; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy;
nursing mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore, Flos Sambuci should not be administered during pregnancy or lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
No information available.
273

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Dosage forms
Crude drug for decoctions and infusions (crude drug also available in tea bags);
as a component of multi-ingredient products (7). Store in a well-closed container, protected from light (2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: crude drug 3–5 g as an infusion (preferably taken hot) three times
daily; 25% ethanol extract 3–5 ml; tincture (1 : 5 in 25% ethanol) 10–25 ml (22).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed., Suppl. 2000. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1999.
3. Pharmacopoeia Hungarica, 7th ed. Budapest, Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Commission,
Medicina Konyvkiado, 1986.
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. University of Illinois at Chicago, IL,
February 9, 1998 production (an on-line database available directly through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN]
of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston,
1950.
7. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
8. Zargari A. Medicinal plants. Vol. 2, 3rd ed. Teheran, Teheran University Publication,
1982.
9. Pharmacopoea helvetica, 8th ed. Berne, Département fédéral de l’intérieur, 1997.
10. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
11. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
12. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
13. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for healthcare professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
14. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
15. A nationwide compilation of traditional Chinese medicine herbs, 1st ed. Beijing, People’s
Health Publishing House, 1975.
16. Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for antiinflammatory activity. Phytotherapy Research, 1987, 1:28–31.
17. Delaveau P, Lallouette P, Tessier AM. Stimulation of the phagocytic activity of the
reticuloendothelial system by plant extracts. Planta Medica, 1980, 40:49–54.
18. Yesilada E et al. Inhibitory effects of Turkish folk remedies on inflammatory
cytokines: interleukin-1a, interleukin-1b, and tumor necrosis factor a. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology, 1997, 58:59–73.
19. Rebuelta M et al. Étude de l’effet diurétique de différentes préparations des fleurs
du Sambucus nigra L. Plantes médicinales et Phytothérapie, 1983, 17:173–181.
20. Schmersahl KJ. Über die Wirkstoffe der diaphoretischen Drogen des DAB 6.
Naturwissenschaften, 1964, 51:361.

274

Flos Sambuci
21. Wiechowski W. Die Bedeutung der schweisstreibenden Tees. Medizinische Klinik,
1927, 23:590–592.
22. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. I. Bournemouth, British Herbal
Medicine Association, 1992.

275

Radix Senegae

Definition
Radix Senegae consists of the dried roots and root crowns of Polygala senega
L., Polygala senega L. var. latifolia Torrey et Gray, or other closely related Polygala species (Polygalaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Polygala senegum L. (1), P. rosea Steud., Senega officinalis Spach (4).

Selected vernacular names
Bambara, bulughâ lon, gizr uththuban, Klapperschlangenwurzel, mountain flax,
peuhl, polygala de virginie, racine de polygala, racine de senega, Radix polygalae, Radix polygalae senegae, rattlesnake root, seneca snakeroot, Senegakreuzblume, senega root, senega snakeroot, Senegawurzel, snake root, szenega
gyökér, tsuknida, vahulill, virginische Schlangenwurzel, yoruba (1–3, 5–7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to eastern Canada and north-eastern United States of America (6–8).

Description
A perennial herbaceous plant with numerous stems sprouting from a single
thick gnarled crown arising from a conical, twisted, branched yellow root.
Aerial portion consists of several erect or ascending, smooth stems up to 15–
40 cm high, bearing alternate, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate leaves with serrulate margins. Inflorescence a spike of small, white flowers, which are almost
sessile with rounded-obovate wings, concave with a short crested carina (1, 7).

Plant material of interest: dried roots and root crowns
General appearance
Root crown greyish-brown, wider than the root; diameter of the root crown
up to 3 cm, gradually tapering to the tip; surface transversely and longitudinally
striated, often shows a more or less distinct decurrent, elongated spiral keel.
Forms an irregular head consisting of numerous remains of stems and tightly
276

Radix Senegae
packed purplish-brown to red buds. Taproot, 0.5–1.5 cm in diameter and 3–
20 cm in length, brown to yellow, occasionally branched, sometimes flexuous,
usually without secondary roots, except in the Japanese varieties and species,
which contain numerous fibrous branched rootlets. Fracture short and shows
a yellowish cortex of varying thickness surrounding a pale central woody area
somewhat circular or irregular in shape, depending on the species (1–3).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic, faint, sweet, slightly rancid or reminiscent of methyl
salicylate, sternutatory when in powder form; taste: sweet, subsequently acrid
and irritating to the throat (1–3).

Microscopic characteristics
Cork layer consisting of several rows of light-brown cork cells; secondary
cortex composed of parenchyma cells and sieve tubes, traversed by medullary
rays, 1–3 cells wide. Phelloderm of slightly collenchymatous cells containing
droplets of oil. Phloem and xylem arrangement usually normal, especially near
the crown, but where a keel is present, it is formed by increased development
of phloem; other anomalous secondary development sometimes occurs, resulting in formation of 1 or 2 large wedge-shaped rays in phloem and xylem, the
parenchymatous cells of which contain droplets of oil. Xylem usually central,
consists of vessels up to 60 mm in diameter associated with numerous thinwalled tracheids and a few small lignified parenchymatous cells. Starch grains
and calcium oxalate crystals absent (1–3).

Powdered plant material
Light brown. Longitudinal fragments of lignified tissue made up of pitted
tracheids and somewhat larger vessels with numerous bordered pits or with
reticulate thickening; yellowish parenchyma and collenchymatous cells containing droplets of oil; occasional fragments of cork and epidermal tissue with
stomata and unicellular trichomes from bud scales. Calcium oxalate crystals
and stone cells are absent (1–3).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1–3), chemical tests and froth formation (1, 2), and thin-layer chromatography for the presence of saponins (3).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (9).
277

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% stems and not more than 1% other foreign matter (2).

Total ash
Not more than 6% (3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2% (1, 2).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 30% in 20% alcohol (2).

Loss on drying
Not more than 13% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (3). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (3) and the
WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (9) and
pesticide residues (10).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (9).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (9) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and water-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Quantitative analysis of triterpene saponins by high-performance liquid chromatography (11).

Major chemical constituents
Methyl salicylate (0.1–0.3%), the compound responsible for the characteristic
odour of the drug (12). The major reported biologically active constituents
are triterpene saponins (6–16%) (6, 8, 13). The saponins are 3-glucosides of
278

Radix Senegae
presenegenin, which also contain at C-28 an oligosaccharide chain that has a
fucose moiety esterified with 3,4-dimethoxycinnamic or 4-methoxycinnamic
acid (14–16). The structures of the representative saponins are presented below.
CH3

H3C
H
H

HO

HO

CH3

H

H

O O
OH

O

CH3

2
H
R
CO2H
O

H3C

HO

OH
CH3

O

R1

R2

R3

(E )-senegasaponin A

H

E-MC

Api

(Z )-senegasaponin A

H

Z-MC

Api

desacylsenegasaponin A

H

H

Api

(E )-senegasaponin B

H

E-MC

H

(Z )-senegasaponin B

H

Z-MC

H

senegin II

H

E-DMC

H

(Z )-senegin II

H

Z-DMC

H

desacylsenegin II

H

H

H

(E )-senegin III

Rha

E-MC

H

(Z )-senegin III

Rha

Z-MC

H

desacylsenegin III

Rha

H

H

O
O R

1

OH
O

HO

O O

O
CH3

OH
O O

HO
OH

OH

3

R

O

OH

OH
O
C
E-MC R = H

H3CO

E-DMC R = OCH3

R

HO

H3CO

O
R

RhaRha
= =

Api =
OH

OH

D-apio-b-D-furanosyl

Z-MC R = H
Z-DMC R = OCH3

HOHO

O

C

OO

CHCH
3 3
HOHO OHOH

6-deoxy-a-L-mannopyranosyl

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As an expectorant for symptomatic treatment of coughs due to bronchitis,
emphysema and catarrh of the upper respiratory tract (1, 6, 14, 17–19).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of amenorrhoea, asthma, constipation, rheumatism and snake bites
(5).
279

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Expectorant activity
Intragastric administration of a fluidextract of Radix Senegae (0.1–10 ml/kg
body weight) enhanced the production of respiratory tract fluid in decerebrate
or anaesthetized animals. Three to four hours after administration, the output
of respiratory tract fluid increased by up to 173% in cats and 186% in guineapigs, but no effect was observed in rabbits (20). In another study, administration of a syrup of the root to anaesthetized dogs significantly increased the
volume of respiratory tract fluid within 5–30 minutes (P < 0.001); after 2 hours,
the fluid volume in the treatment group was 0.114 ml as compared with
0.01 ml in control animals treated with saline (21). Intragastric administration
of a 50% methanol extract of the root (2 g/kg body weight) inhibited stressinduced gastric ulcers in rats by 98.5% (22). Intragastric administration of an
aqueous suspension of a 50% methanol extract of the root (2 g/kg body weight)
to rats reduced congestive oedema by 62% and significantly increased the 24hour urine volume as compared with control animals (P < 0.01) (23).
Effect on blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels
Intraperitoneal administration of an n-butanol extract of the root (5 mg/kg body
weight) reduced blood triglyceride levels in mice fed a normal diet, and reduced
blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels in mice fed a high cholesterol diet (24).
Antihyperglycaemic activity
Intraperitoneal administration of an n-butanol extract of the roots (10 mg/kg
body weight) reduced blood glucose levels in healthy mice and in mice with
streptozocin-induced hyperglycaemia (25). Intragastric administration of a
saponin fraction of a root extract reduced glucose-induced hyperglycaemia in
rats at a dose of 200 mg/kg body weight (16). Intraperitoneal administration
of a saponin fraction of a root extract (25 mg/kg body weight) significantly
increased the plasma levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisone and
glucose in rats (P < 0.01) (26). Intragastric administration of a 100% methanol
extract of the root decreased the absorption of ethanol in rats (500 mg/kg body
weight) (15).
Toxicity
The LD50 of the root was 17 g/kg body weight after intragastric administration
to mice. The LD50 of the root bark was 10 g/kg body weight and that of the
root core (which had the lowest saponin concentration of the three root
samples) was 75 g/kg body weight (13).

280

Radix Senegae

Clinical pharmacology
Expectorant activity
The expectorant activity of the crude drug is due to the constituent saponins
which produce local irritation of the mucous membranes of the throat and
respiratory tract. This irritation stimulates an increase in bronchial secretions, thereby diluting the mucus, reducing its viscosity and facilitating expectoration (19–21, 27, 28). Saponins may also reduce the surface tension of
mucus, thus reducing its viscosity (29). Oral administration of a fluidextract
of the root was shown to reduce the viscosity of mucus in patients with
bronchiectasis (17).

Contraindications
Pregnancy (See Precautions).

Warnings
If coughing persists for more than 7 days, seek medical advice. Radix Senegae
may exacerbate existing gastrointestinal inflammations such as gastritis or
gastric ulcers, and excessive doses may cause vomiting (30).

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No mutagenic effects of an aqueous or 50% methanol extract of the root were
observed in the Bacillus subtilis recombination assay or in the microsome reversion assay in Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98 and TA100 (31).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Traditional uses for Radix Senegae include its use as an emmenagogue (5). As
extracts of the root have been shown to stimulate uterine contractions in animal
models (32), Radix Senegae should not be taken during pregnancy.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; nursing mothers; or

281

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
paediatric use. Therefore, Radix Senegae should not be administered during
lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Overdose with Radix Senegae preparations may cause nausea, diarrhoea and
vomiting due to gastrointestinal upset (13). In sensitive individuals, gastrointestinal upset may occur even at the therapeutic dosage (33, 34).

Dosage forms
Chopped crude drug for decoctions and extracts (6, 18). Store in a tightly closed
container, protected from light and humidity (3).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 1.5–3.0 g crude drug as an infusion or decoction in divided doses
(18, 35). A 60% ethanol extract (made slightly alkaline with dilute ammonia):
0.9–3 ml; tincture: 2.5–7.5 g. Equivalent preparations (18).

References
1. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Organization of African Unity, Scientific
Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
2. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 13th ed. (English version). Tokyo, Ministry of Health
and Welfare, 1996.
3. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
4. Hooker JD, Jackson BD. Index Kewensis. Vol. 1. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1895.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
1994.
7. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston,
1950.
8. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
9. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
10. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
11. Kanazawa H et al. Determination of acidic saponins in crude drugs by highperformance liquid chromatography on octadecylsilyl porous glass. Journal of Chromatography, 1993, 630:408–414.
12. Hayashi S, Kameoka H. Volatile compounds of Polygala senega L. var. latifolia Torrey
et Gray roots. Flavour and Fragrance Journal, 1995, 10:273–280.

282

Radix Senegae
13. De Smet PAGM. Polygala species. In: De Smet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse effects of
herbal drugs. Vol. 2. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
14. Samuelsson G. Drugs of natural origin, a textbook of pharmacognosy. Stockholm,
Swedish Pharmaceutical Press, 1992.
15. Yoshikawa M et al. E-Senegasaponins A and B, Z-senegasaponins A and B, Zsenegins II and III, new type inhibitors of ethanol absorption in rats from Senegae
radix, the roots of Polygala senega L. var. latifolia Torrey et Gray. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1995, 43:350–352.
16. Yoshikawa M et al. Bioactive saponins and glycosides. II. Senegae radix. (2): Chemical structures, hypoglycemic activity, and ethanol absorption-inhibitory effect of
E-senegasaponin C, Z-senegasaponin C, and Z-senegins II, III and IV. Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1996, 44:1305–1313.
17. Basch FP, Holinger P, Poncher HG. Physical and chemical properties of sputum. II.
Influence of drugs, steam, carbon dioxide and oxygen. American Journal of Diseases
of Childhood, 1941, 62:1149–1171.
18. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
19. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia, 30th ed. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
20. Boyd EM, Palmer ME. Effect of Quillaja, Senega, Grindelia, Sanguinaria, Chionanthus
and Dioscorea upon the output of respiratory tract fluid. Acta Pharmacologia Toxicologia, 1946, 2:235–239.
21. Misawa M, Yanaura S. Continuous determination of tracheobronchial secretory
activity in dogs. Japanese Journal of Pharmacology, 1980, 30:221–229.
22. Yamahara J et al. Biological active principles of the crude drugs. II. Antiulcerogenic
and anti-inflammatory actions of the crude drugs containing saponin. Yakugaku
Zasshi, 1975, 95:1179–1182.
23. Yamahara J et al. Effects of crude drugs on congestive edema. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1979, 27:1464–1468.
24. Masuda H et al. Intraperitoneal administration of Senegae Radix extract and its main
component, senegin-II, affects lipid metabolism in normal and hyperlipidemic mice.
Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1996, 19:315–317.
25. Kato M et al. Hypoglycemic effect of the rhizomes of Polygala senega in normal and
diabetic mice and its main component, the triterpenoid glycoside senegin-II. Planta
Medica, 1996, 62:440–443.
26. Yokoyama H et al. Effects of total saponins extracted from several crude drugs
on rat adrenocortical hormone secretion. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1982, 102:555–
559.
27. Boyd EM. Expectorants and respiratory tract fluid. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1954, 6:521–542.
28. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 3. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1997.
29. Hostettmann K, Marston A. Saponins. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1995.
30. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for healthcare professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
31. Morimoto I et al. Mutagenicity screening of crude drugs with Bacillus subtilis
rec-assay and Salmonella/microsome reversion assay. Mutation Research, 1982, 97:
81–102.
32. Goto M et al. Uterus-contracting ingredients in plants. Takeda Kenkyusho Nempo,
1957, 16:21.
33. Briggs CJ. Senega snakeroot—a traditional Canadian herbal medicine. Canadian
Pharmaceutical Journal, 1988, 121:199–201.

283

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
34. Wichtl M. Senegawurzel. In: Wichtl M, ed. Teedrogen. Ein Handbuch für die Praxis
auf wissenschaftlicher Grundlage. 2. Auflage. Stuttgart, Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1989.
35. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Bournemouth, British Herbal
Medicine Association, 1992.

284

Fructus Serenoae Repentis

Definition
Fructus Serenoae Repentis consists of the dried ripe fruits of Serenoa repens
(Bartr.) Small. (Arecaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Brahea serrulata (Michx.) H. Wendl., Chamaerops serrulata Michx., Corypha repens
Bartr., Sabal serrulata (Michx.) Nichols, Sabal serrulata (Michx.) Nuttall. ex
Schult., Serenoa serrulata Hook., Serenoa serrulata Roem. et Schult., Serenoa
serrulatum (Michx.) Benth et Hook, Serenoa serrulatum Schult. (1, 3–5).

Selected vernacular names
American dwarf palm tree, dwarf palm tree, dwarf palmetto, fan palm, sabal,
sabal fructus, Sägepalmenfrüchte, saw palmetto, saw palmetto berries, serenoa
(1, 2, 5, 6).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to the south-east of the United States of America, from South
Carolina to Florida (2, 6).

Description
Low scrubby palm growing in sandy soil, with characteristic creeping rhizome,
one end of which rises a short distance above ground, surrounded by a dense
crown of leaves with saw-like margins. Petioles slender and spinose on edges;
blade fan-shaped, with palmate divisions that are slightly cleft at the summit.
Inflorescence densely tomentose and shorter than the leaves. Fruit a 1-seeded
drupe (6).

Plant material of interest: dried ripe fruits
General appearance
Drupe superior, ellipsoidal, ovoid or somewhat globular, 1.5–3.0 cm long, 1.0–
1.5 cm in diameter; dark brown to black with a smooth, dull surface, somewhat
oily, with a few large, angular depressions and ridges due to contraction of the
285

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
inner layer on drying; summit marked by remains of style; base marked by
stem-scars or has remains of stem. Epicarp and sarcocarp together form a thin
coriaceous shell enclosing a hard but thin endocarp; endocarp externally
reddish-brown and somewhat fibrous, as is inner layer of the sarcocarp; inner
layer of endocarp smooth, enclosing an ellipsoidal or ovoid, hard somewhat
flattened, anatropous, reddish-brown seed marked on the raphe side by an
arillus-like appendage and marked on the opposite side near the end by the
micropyle, which forms a slight projection; has a large endosperm of thickwalled parenchyma and a very small embryo at the micropyle (2, 3, 6).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: pronounced, aromatic, fruity; taste: sweetish, aromatic, slightly acrid (6).

Microscopic characteristics
Sarcocarp covered by a small-celled, thin-walled epidermis. Outermost layers
of pulp wall contain yellowish-brown or brownish-red substances; inner layers
have scattered single cells containing brown substances; occasional large, thickwalled, punctate stone cells with wide lumens. Innermost layer of sarcocarp
wall consists almost completely of thick-walled, punctate, irregularly shaped
stone cells. Outer layer of the seed coat consists of thick-walled large cells; cells
in middle layer smaller and thin-walled; cells of innermost layer small and flattened; contents of all seed-coat cells non-punctate brown. Outer endosperm
cells radially elongated, coarse-walled and inner cells larger, thick-walled and
coarsely punctate. Vascular bundles accompanied by fibres with stigmata which
have siliceous solids attached (3, 6).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-brown. Fragments of sarcocarp, the cells of which contain
yellowish-brown or brownish-red amorphous substances; whitish fragments of
endosperm, the cell walls considerably thickened and with large pores; occasional stone cells, nearly colourless, more or less tabular or irregular in shape,
up to 140 mm in length, with walls about 15 mm thick, showing numerous
simple or branching pores (2, 6).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (2, 3, 6), and thin-layer chromatography (7).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (8).
286

Fructus Serenoae Repentis

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (2, 3).

Total ash
Not more than 5% (3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1% (2, 3).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 8% (2, 3).

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (9). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (9), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (8) and
pesticide residues (10).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (8).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (8) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Quantitation of fatty acids, both free and as their corresponding ethyl
esters, by gas chromatography. The total fatty acid content is not less than
9.0%, and the amounts of individual fatty acids are not less than 3.0% oleic,
2.0% lauric, 1.2% myristic, 1.1% palmitic, 0.4% linoleic, 0.2% caphoic, 0.2%
caprylic, 0.2% capric, 0.1% palmitoleic, 0.1% stearic and 0.1% linolenic
acids (3).
287

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are free fatty acids and their corresponding ethyl esters;
sterols and lipids. The primary fatty acid constituents include oleic, lauric,
myristic, palmitic, linoleic, caphoic, caprylic, capric, palmitoleic, stearic and
linolenic acids (5, 11, 12). The major sterols include b-sitosterol, stigmasterol
and daucosterol (13). The lipids consist of triglycerides of fatty acids. The structures of some of the free fatty acids are presented below.

lauric acid

H3C

linoleic acid

H3C

linolenic acid

H3C

CO2H
CO2H
CO2H

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms (nocturia, polyuria, urinary retention) secondary to BPH stages I and II, as defined by Alken (1, 4, 14–33), in
cases where diagnosis of prostate cancer is negative.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
As a diuretic and to treat an enlarged prostate (2).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
As an aphrodisiac, a sedative and a nutritional tonic, as well as for the treatment
of bronchitis, cystitis, dysmenorrhoea, sore throat and the common cold (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antispasmodic activity
Both lipid and saponifiable fractions of Fructus Serenoae Repentis reduced
norepinephrine-induced contractions in vitro of rat aorta (IC50 0.53 and
0.50 mg/ml, respectively), as well as potassium chloride-induced contractions
of rat uterus (EC50 0.35 and 0.43 mg/ml, respectively) (34). A 90% ethanol
extract of the fruit reduced vanadate-induced contractions of the rat uterus
(EC50 11.41 mg/ml). Norepinephrine-induced contractions of rat deferential duct,
and potassium chloride-induced contractions of guinea-pig ileum and bladder
smooth muscle tissue were reduced by the addition of a 90% ethanol extract
of the fruit (0.33 and 0.15 mg/ml, respectively) (35).
288

Fructus Serenoae Repentis
Anti-inflammatory activity
Intragastric administration of an ethanol extract of the fruit to rats (5.0 g/kg
body weight) inhibited carrageenan-induced footpad oedema (36). External
application of a 90% ethanol extract of the fruit (500 mg) to mice inhibited
croton oil-induced ear oedema by 42% (37).
Intragastric administration of an n-hexane extract of the fruit to rats (10 ml/kg
body weight) decreased capillary permeability induced by histamine, compound 48/80 and dextran, and generalized oedema induced by dextran (38). A
carbon dioxide (supercritical) extract of the fruit inhibited cyclooxygenase and
5-lipoxygenase in vitro (IC50 28.1 and 18.0 mg/ml, respectively) (39). A lipidosterolic extract of the fruit inhibited the in vitro production of leukotriene B4 in
human polymorphonuclear neutrophils stimulated with the calcium ionophore
A23187 (40). An ethanol extract of the fruit also suppressed A23187-stimulated
synthesis of leukotriene B4 (IC50 8.3 mg/ml) and thromboxane B2 (IC50 15.4 mg/ml)
in rat peritoneal leukocytes in vitro (37).
Immunostimulatory activity
Intraperitoneal administration of a polysaccharide fraction, isolated from an
aqueous extract of the fruit, to mice (10 mg/kg body weight) had immunostimulant activity, as measured by the colloidal carbon clearance test (41). An
increased rate of phagocytosis by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes
was observed in cells treated with a polysaccharide fraction of the extract
(10 mg/ml) (41).
Anti-gonadotropic effects
n-Hexane extracts of the fruit had anti-androgenic and anti-estrogenic activity
in vitro (42–47). Dihydrotestosterone and testosterone uptake by cytosolic
androgen receptors of human foreskin and other tissues was inhibited by
40.9% and 41.9%, respectively, after treatment of the tissues with the extract
(42). In another study, the binding of [3H]dihydrotestosterone to both cytosolic and nuclear androgen receptors in cultured human foreskin fibroblasts was
inhibited by 90% and 70%, respectively, after treatment of the cells with a
sterol fraction of the n-hexane extract (IC50 7.1 units/ml) (43). An n-hexane fruit
extract inhibited androgen binding to cytosolic androgen receptors of rat prostatic tissue in a specific and competitive manner (IC50 330.0–367.5 mg/ml) (44,
45). However, in contrast to these findings, the same extract did not inhibit
the binding of [3H]dihydrotestosterone to androgen receptors in cultured human foreskin fibroblasts (46). Oral administration of an n-hexane extract
(160 mg/day) inhibited the binding of 3H-labelled 17b-estradiol to the nuclear
estrogen receptors in samples of prostatic tissue from patients with BPH.
Binding to the cytosolic and nuclear estrogen and androgen receptors was measured by saturation analysis and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (47).
The effect of an n-hexane extract of the fruit was evaluated in two human
prostatic cell lines, LNCaP and PC3, which are respectively responsive and unre289

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
sponsive to androgen stimulation. The extract (100 mg/ml) induced proliferation
and differentiation in LNCaP cells, but not in PC3 cells, suggesting that the androgen receptor plays a role in mediating the effects of the fruit in LNCaP cells (48).
In PC3 cells cotransfected with genes for wild-type androgen receptor and a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter under the control of an androgenresponsive element, the extract (25 mg/ml) inhibited androgen-induced chloramphenicol acetyltransferase transcription by 70% (48).
n-Hexane, 90% ethanol and supercritical carbon dioxide extracts of the fruit
inhibited 5a-reductase activity in vitro (37, 43, 46, 49–53). A lipidosterolic
extract of the fruit (100 mg/ml) inhibited 5a-reductase activity in the rat
ventral prostate by 50%, and reduced conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone in human foreskin fibroblasts by 90%. The conversion of
dihydrotestosterone to 5a-androstane-3a-17b-diol by 3a-ketosteroid oxidoreductase was also partially inhibited in cultured human foreskin fibroblasts
(43). An n-hexane extract of the fruit inhibited the activity of both 5areductase and 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in cultures of epithelial cells
(IC50 60 and 40 mg/ml, respectively) and fibroblast cells (IC50 30 and 200 mg/ml,
respectively) obtained from the prostates of patients with BPH (50). One study
reported no effect of several lipidosterolic extracts of the fruit on the activity
of 5a-reductase from human prostate or on dihydrotestosterone binding to the
rat prostatic androgen receptors at concentrations up to 100 mg/ml (51). The
reasons for these conflicting results are unclear, and may be due to the different methodologies used. Recently, it has been demonstrated that human 5areductase has two isoforms, type 1 and type 2; finasteride, a testosterone
5a-reductase inhibitor has been shown to be a selective inhibitor of the type 2
isoform (inhibitory concentration [Ki] 7.3 nmol/l). Furthermore, an n-hexane
extract of the fruit was a non-competitive inhibitor of the type 1 isoform (IC50
7.2 mg/ml) and an uncompetitive inhibitor of type 2 (IC50 4.9 mg/ml) (52). A
90% ethanol extract of the fruit showed a dose-dependent inhibition of 5areductase activity in the epithelium (29% inhibition) and stroma (45% inhibition) of prostate tissue from patients with BPH (52). When the extract was
fractionated into saponifiable, non-saponifiable and hydrophilic subfractions,
only the saponifiable subfraction (consisting mainly of lauric, oleic, myristic
and palmitic acids) was active. Of these fatty acids, lauric acid was the most
active: it inhibited epithelial and stromal 5a-reductase activity by 51% and
42%, respectively. The inhibition by lauric acid was noncompetitive and dosedependent up to a concentration of 0.2 mmol/l. The nonsaponifiable fraction,
consisting mainly of phytosterols, was weakly active, while the hydrophilic
subfractions, containing carbohydrates, amino acids and polysaccharides, were
inactive (53). A supercritical extract of the fruit inhibited 5a-reductase activity
in homogenates of cultured human foreskin fibroblasts (IC50 0.025 mg/ml) (46).
One study compared testosterone metabolism in primary cultures of epithelial cells and fibroblasts obtained from the prostates of patients with BPH and
prostate cancer. In all cultures, androst-4-ene-3,12-dione, formed by the oxidation of testosterone by 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, accounted for 80%
290

Fructus Serenoae Repentis
of all metabolites recovered. An n-hexane extract of the fruit inhibited the formation of androst-4-ene-3,12-dione in both cell types, indicating that it inhibited the activity of 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, unlike finasteride,
which was inactive (50).
An increase in the activity of 3a-hydroxysteroid-oxidoreductase (the enzyme
that metabolizes dihydrotestosterone into the inactive androstenediol form) in
prostate tissue from patients with BPH was reported following treatment of
patients with an n-hexane extract of the fruit (320 mg daily for 3 months). Analysis of enzyme kinetics showed that the Vmax of 3-hydroxysteroid-oxidoreductase
was significantly enhanced in the prostate stroma of treated patients. Since
3-hydroxysteroid-oxidoreductase also has a strong substrate affinity for
prostaglandins, increased activity of the enzyme may also increase the metabolism of prostaglandins, thereby accounting for the reduction of prostaglandinmediated congestion or intraprostatic oedema formation (54).
Intragastric administration of an n-hexane extract of the fruit to castrated
rats for 60–90 days inhibited the increase in total weight of the prostate induced
by estradiol and testosterone (55). Intragastric administration of a 90% ethanol
extract to castrated rats (6 ml/kg body weight, weekly for 8 weeks) inhibited
the increase in weight of the ventral prostate, seminal vesicles and coagulation
glands induced by testosterone (37). Intragastric administration of a 90%
ethanol extract of the fruit inhibited prostate growth stimulated by both estradiol and dihydrotestosterone in nude mice into which prostate tissue from
humans with BPH had been transplanted (56). An n-hexane extract of the fruit
(30 mg/ml) inhibited the proliferation of human prostate cells induced by basic
fibroblast growth factor. Lupenone, hexacosanol and an unsaponified fraction
of the extract markedly inhibited the proliferation of human prostate cells
induced by basic fibroblast growth factor, but had only a minimal effect on
basal cell proliferation (57).
Effects on signal transduction
Addition of an n-hexane extract of the fruit (1–10 mg/ml) to Chinese hamster
ovary cells completely inhibited the effects of prolactin on potassium conductance, protein kinase C activity and intracellular concentrations of calcium.
These results suggest that the extract may inhibit prolactin-induced prostatic
growth by interfering with the transduction signals involving the prolactin
receptor (58). Lipidosterolic extracts of the fruit noncompetitively inhibited
radioligand binding to human prostatic a1-adrenoceptors and agonist-induced
[3H]inositol phosphate formation (59).

Clinical pharmacology
Placebo-controlled clinical trials
Eleven double-blind, placebo-controlled studies have assessed the effects of lipidosterolic extracts of Fructus Serenoae Repentis in the symptomatic treatment
of mild to moderate BPH (26–33, 60–62). The number of patients in each study
291

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
ranged from 22 to 205, and the dosage of the extract was generally 160 mg
twice daily for 1–3 months. All but one study (61) reported that the extract was
significantly more effective than placebo in reducing the symptoms of mild to
moderate BPH. In this study of 70 patients, which was also randomized,
although a significant improvement in flow rate was seen in patients treated
with either a hexane extract of the fruit (320 mg) or placebo daily for 3 months,
no significant difference between the treatment groups was observed (61).
However, most studies demonstrated an increase in urinary flow rate and a
decrease in postvoid residual urine volume (26). In another study which was
also randomized, 205 patients were treated with 320 mg extract or placebo
daily for 3 months. The study concluded that the extract was superior to
placebo in reducing the total symptom score (polyuria, nocturia, dysuria, and
urgency and hesitancy of micturition), improving the quality of life score, and
increasing urinary volume (62).
A study was performed on 176 patients with BPH who had been unresponsive to placebo treatment in previous clinical studies. After 30 days of treatment with an extract of the fruit (160 mg, twice daily), there was a significant
reduction in dysuria, polyuria and nocturia in the treated group as compared
with the placebo group. Patients treated with the extract had a significantly
greater increase in mean peak urinary flow rate (28.9%), as compared
with those that received the placebo (8.5%), and the overall efficacy of the
extract was rated higher than that of the placebo by both patients and
physicians (33).
Another double-blind, placebo-controlled study assessed the effect of a lipidosterolic extract in the reduction of prostate oedema and congestion in 18
patients with BPH. Histopathological analysis of enucleated prostate tissue
from patients treated preoperatively with the extract (320 mg daily for 12
weeks) showed a significant decrease in prostate stromal oedema and congestion in treated patients, as compared with those in the placebo group (P  0.05)
(63).
Controlled clinical trials
In a controlled clinical trial, 25 men with symptoms of urinary obstruction were
randomized into two groups: 15 patients received no treatment, while 10 were
treated with an n-hexane extract of Fructus Serenoae Repentis (320 mg extract
daily). After 3 months, prostatic specimens were removed by suprapubic
prostatectomy and were sectioned into three regions (i.e. periurethral, subcapsular and intermediate). In each region, the concentration of testosterone,
dihydrotestosterone and epidermal growth factor was measured by radioimmunoassay. In the patients treated with the extract, a significant reduction
(P < 0.001) in the concentration of dihydrotestosterone (50%) and epidermal
growth factor (50%), and a significant increase (P < 0.001) in testosterone levels
(125%), were observed in the periurethral region (64).

292

Fructus Serenoae Repentis

Clinical trials without controls
Numerous clinical studies without controls of men with BPH have reported
improvements in both objective and subjective variables after treatment with
lipidosterolic extracts of the fruit (15–28). The largest trial of 1334 patients
treated with 320 mg of a lipidosterolic fruit extract daily for 6 months showed
an improvement in postvoid residual urine volume (50% decrease), nocturia
(54% decrease) and polyuria (37% decrease) (16). The results of a prospective
multicentre study in which 435 patients with BPH were treated with a lipidosterolic extract of the fruit (320 mg daily for 3 years) showed a steady
improvement in micturition. The improvement was due to a marked decrease
in symptoms and postvoid residual urine volume (50% decrease), and an
increase in peak urinary flow rate (about 25%) (17). Another multicentre study
analysed the effect of a lipidosterolic extract of the fruit (160 mg twice daily for
3 months) in 305 patients with mild to moderate BPH. After treatment,
increases in maximal and mean urinary flow rates (of 25% and 27%, respectively) and a 35% improvement in the mean International Prostate Symptom
Score were seen (18). Other studies have also reported improvements in symptoms and objective measurements of disease severity after 1–6 months of treatment with a lipidosterolic extract of the fruit (320 mg daily) (19–28). Generally,
studies involving periodic evaluation over the course of treatment have demonstrated that improvements in both objective and subjective variables were progressive over time (17, 24–27).

Comparative trials
An n-hexane extract of Fructus Serenoae Repentis, finasteride and a1-receptor
antagonists have been shown to be clinically effective in the treatment of BPH
in comparative trials (16, 65–69). One large international randomized, doubleblind clinical trial compared the efficacy of the extract (320 mg daily) with that
of finasteride (5 mg daily) in the treatment of 1098 patients with mild to moderate BPH. After 6 months of therapy, the International Prostate Symptom Score
decreased from baseline by 37% in patients treated with the extract as compared with a decrease of 39% in patients who received finasteride. No significant difference was observed between the treatment groups in improvement
of patient-rated quality of life scores and the primary end-point of objective
symptom score. Both treatments resulted in improved peak urinary flow rates
and a reduction in the size of the prostate. Peak urinary flow rate increased
from 10.6 ml/s to 13.3 ml/s in patients treated with the extract, and from
10.8 ml/s to 14.0 ml/s in those who received finasteride. The size of the prostate
was reduced by 6% in patients treated with the extract, and by 18% in those
treated with finasteride. Serum prostate-specific antigen levels were reduced by
41% following finasteride treatment, but remained unchanged in patients
treated with the extract (16).

293

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Other smaller, shorter, randomized double-blind trials involving groups of
41–63 patients compared the efficacy of the fruit extract (320 mg daily) with
the a1-receptor antagonists alfuzosin and prazosin (68, 69). In a 3-week comparative trial with alfuzosin, the total mean symptom score using Boyarsky’s
rating scale improved by 27% and 39% in patients treated with the extract
and alfuzosin, respectively. Although improvements in the peak urinary flow
rates were greater in the alfuzosin-treated group, there was no significant difference between the treatments (68). In a 12-week randomized trial comparing
the efficacy of a fruit extract (in 20 patients) and prazocin (in 21 patients),
improvements in polyuria, mean urinary flow rate and postvoid residual urine
volume were similar in both groups, but no statistical analysis of the data was
provided by the investigators (67). Further large, well-designed, randomized
trials of long duration are necessary to compare adequately the clinical efficacy
of Fructus Serenoae Repentis and a1-receptor antagonists.
Four reviews of the randomized controlled clinical trials have indicated that
lipidosterolic extracts of the fruit improve the symptoms of urinary tract
disorders and urinary flow rates in men with mild to moderate BPH (14, 68–
70).
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of Fructus Serenoae Repentis were investigated in a bioequivalence study that compared a new capsule formulation (320 mg/capsule)
to a reference preparation (160 mg/capsule). Concentrations of the components
of the extract were measured in plasma samples from 12 healthy fasting
males (mean age 24 years) after oral administration of 320 mg extract (either
one capsule of 320 mg or two capsules of 160 mg) (71). However, the methodology used in this study was questionable.
Tissue distribution was measured in rats after intragastric administration
of a lipidosterolic extract supplemented with radiolabelled oleic acid, lauric acid
or b-sitosterol. This investigation demonstrated that the uptake of the extract
was much higher in the prostate than either the liver or genitourinary tissues
(72).
Toxicity
Clinical studies have shown that extracts of Fructus Serenoae Repentis are very
well tolerated in humans (16, 69). Minor gastrointestinal side-effects have
been reported in most of the clinical trials, but results from standard blood
chemistry tests were normal (69).

Contraindications
Owing to its effects on androgen and estrogen metabolism, the use of Fructus
Serenoae Repentis during pregnancy or lactation and in children under the age
of 12 years is contraindicated.
294

Fructus Serenoae Repentis

Warnings
Fructus Serenoae Repentis relieves the symptoms associated with BPH, but
does not have an effect on the size of the prostate. If symptoms worsen or do
not improve, or in cases of blood in the urine or acute urinary retention, contact
a physician (1).

Precautions
Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications. There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Fructus
Serenoae Repentis during pregnancy.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications. There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Fructus
Serenoae Repentis during pregnancy.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications. There is no therapeutic rationale for the use of Fructus
Serenoae Repentis during lactation.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; or carcinogenesis, mutagenesis and impairment of fertility.

Adverse reactions
Both short- and long-term clinical studies have found that extracts of Fructus
Serenoae Repentis are very well tolerated. Occasional nausea, diarrhoea and
other minor gastrointestinal complaints have been reported (18).

Dosage forms
Crude drug, lipidosterolic extracts (n-hexane, 90% ethanol or fluid [carbon
dioxide] supercritical extracts standardized to contain 70–95% free fatty acids
and corresponding ethyl esters), and preparations thereof. Store in a tightly
closed container in a cool, dry place.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 1–2 g crude drug or 320 mg (as a single dose or 160 mg twice
daily) of a lipidosterolic extract (n-hexane, 90% ethanol or supercritical
295

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
fluid [carbon dioxide] extract standardized to contain between 70 and 95%
free fatty acids and corresponding ethyl esters) or equivalent preparations
(16–33, 60–62).

References
1. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
3. The United States pharmacopeia 24: national formulary 19. Rockville, MD, United States
Pharmacopeial Convention, 1999.
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Farnsworth NR ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at Chicago,
IL, January 20, 1998 production (an online database available directly through the
University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network
[STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Gathercoal EN, Wirth EH. Pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1936.
7. Hänsel R, Rimpler H, Schoepfliin G. Thin-layer chromatography of Sabal (saw palmetto) fruits. Planta Medica, 1964, 12:169–172.
8. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
9. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
10. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1989.
11. De Swaef SI, Vlietinck AJ. Simultaneous quantitation of lauric acid and ethyl
laureate in Sabal serrulata by capillary gas chromatography and derivatisation with
trimethyl sulphonium hydroxide. Journal of Chromatography, 1996, 719:479–482.
12. Wajda-Dubois JP et al. Comparative study on the lipid fraction of pulp and seeds
of Serenoa repens (Palmaceae). Oleagineux Corps Gras Lipides, 1996, 3:136–139.
13. Hänsel R et al. Eine Dünnschichtchromatographische Untersuchung der Sabalfrüchte. Planta Medica, 1964, 12:136–139.
14. Wilt TJ et al. Saw palmetto extracts for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
A systematic review. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1998, 280:1604–1609.
15. Vahlensieck W et al. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie-Behandlung mit Sabalfrüchteextrakt. Fortschritte der Medizin, 1993, 111:323–326.
16. Carraro JC et al. Comparison of phytotherapy (Permixon®) with finasteride in the
treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: a randomized international study of 1098
patients. Prostate, 1996, 29:231–240.
17. Bach D, Ebeling L. Long-term treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia—results of
a prospective 3-year multicenter study using Sabal extract IDS 89. Phytomedicine,
1996, 3:105–111.
18. Braeckman J. The extract of Serenoa repens in the treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia: a multicenter open study. Current Therapeutic Research, 1994, 55:
776–786.
19. Schneider HJ, Uysal A. Internationaler Prostata-Symptomenscore (I-PSS) im klinischen Alltag. Urologie [B], 1994, 34:443–447.
20. Braekman J et al. Efficacy and safety of the extract of Serenoa repens in the treatment
of benign prostatic hyperplasia: therapeutic equivalence between twice and once
daily dosage forms. Phytotherapy Research, 1997, 11:558–563.
21. Derakhshani P et al. Beeinflussung des Internationalen Prostata-Symptomensore
unter der Therapie mit Sägepalmenfrüchteextrakt bei täglicher Einmalgabe. Urologie
[B], 1997, 37:384–391.

296

Fructus Serenoae Repentis
22. Ziegler H, Hölscher U. Wirksamkeit des Spezialextraktes WS 1473 aus Sägepalmenfrüchteextrakt bei Patienten mit benigner Prostatahyperplasie im Stadium I–II
nach Alken—offene Multicenter-Studie. Jatros Uro, 1998, 14:34–43.
23. Redecker KD, Funk P. Sabal-Extrakt WS 1473 bei benigner Prostatahyperplasie.
Extracta Urologica, 1998, 21:23–25.
24. Hanuš M, Matoušková M. Alternativní léčba BPH — Permixon (Capistan). Rozhledy
Chirurgia, 1993, 72:75–79.
25. Romics I et al. Experience in treating benign prostatic hypertrophy with Sabal serrulata for one year. Journal of International Urology and Nephrology, 1993, 25:565–569.
26. Boccafoschi C, Annoacia S. Confronto fra estratto di Serenoa repens e placebo mediante prova clinica controllata in pazienti co adenmatosi prostatica. Urologia, 1983,
50:1–14.
27. Champault G et al. A double-blind trial of an extract of the plant Serenoa repens
in benign prostatic hyperplasia. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 1984,
18:461–462.
28. Cukier C et al. Serenoa repens extract vs placebo. Comptes rendus de therapeutiques et
de Pharmacologie clinique, 1985, 4:15–21.
29. Descotes JL et al. Placebo-controlled evaluation of the efficacy and tolerability of
Permixon® in benign prostatic hyperplasia after exclusion of placebo responders.
Clinical Drug Investigations, 1995, 9:291–297.
30. Emili E et al. Clinical results on a new drug in the treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia (Permixon). Urologia, 1983, 50:1042–1049.
31. Tasca A et al. Treatment of obstruction in prostatic adenoma using an extract of
Serenoa repens. Double-blind clinical test vs placebo. Minerva Urologica e Nefrologica,
1985, 37:87–91.
32. Mandressi A et al. Treatment of uncomplicated benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH)
by an extract of Serenoa repens: clinical results. Journal of Endocrinology Investigations,
1987, 10 (Suppl. 2):49.
33. Descotes JL et al. Placebo-controlled evaluation of the efficacy and tolerability of
Permixon in benign prostatic hyperplasia after exclusion of placebo responders.
Clinical Drug Investigations, 1995, 9:291–297.
34. Gutierrez M et al. Mechanisms involved in the spasmolytic effect of extracts from
Sabal serrulata fruit on smooth muscle. General Pharmacology, 1996, 27:171–176.
35. Odenthal KP, Rauwald HW. Lipophilic extract from Sabal serrulata inhibits contractions in smooth muscle tissue. Aktuelle Urologie, 1996, 27:152–157.
36. Hiermann A. About the contents of Sabal fruits and their anti-inflammatory effect.
Archiv der Pharmazie (Weinheim), 1989, 322:111–114.
37. Koch E. Pharmakologie und Wirkmechanismen von Extrakten aus Sabalfrüchten
(Sabal fructus), Brennesselwurzeln (Urticae radix) und Kürbissamen (Curcurbitae
peponis semen) bei der Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie. In: Loew D,
Rietbrock N, eds. Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung. Darmstadt,
Steinkopff, 1995:57–79.
38. Tarayre JP et al. Anti-edematous action of a hexane extract from Serenoa repens Bartr.
drupes. Annales pharmaceutiques françaises, 1983, 41:559–570.
39. Breu W et al. Antiphlogistische Wirkung eines mit hyperkritischem Kohlendioxid
gewonnenen Sabalfrucht-Extraktes. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1992, 42:547–551.
40. Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of the lipidic lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens
(Permixon®) on the ionophore A23187-stimulated production of leukotriene B4
(LTB4) from human polymorphonuclear neutrophils. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and
Essential Fatty Acids, 1997, 57:299–304.
41. Wagner H. Immunstimulierend wirkende Polysaccharide (Heteroglykane) aus
höheren Pflanzen. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1985, 35:1069–1075.
42. El-Sheikh MM, Dakkak MR, Saddique A. The effect of Permixon® on androgen
receptors. Acta Obstetrics and Gynecology of Scandinavia, 1988, 67:397–399.

297

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
43. Sultan C et al. Inhibition of androgen metabolism and binding by a liposterolic
extract of “Serenoa repens B” in human foreskin fibroblasts. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry, 1984, 20:515–519.
44. Briley M, Carilla E, Fauran F. Permixon, a new treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia, acts directly at the cytosolic androgen receptor in rat prostate. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 1983, 79:327.
45. Carilla E et al. Binding of Permixon, a new treatment for prostatic benign hyperplasia, to the cytosolic androgen receptor in rat prostate. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry,
1984, 20:521–523.
46. Hagenlocher M et al. Specific inhibition of 5a-reductase by a new extract of Sabal
serrulata. Aktuelle Urologie, 1993, 24:146–149.
47. Di Silverio F et al. Evidence that Serenoa repens extract displays an antiestrogenic
activity in prostatic tissue of benign prostatic hypertrophy patients. European Urology
1992, 21:309–314.
48. Ravenna L et al. Effects of the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon®)
on human prostatic cell lines. Prostate, 1996, 29:219–230.
49. Niederprüm HJ et al. Testosterone 5a-reductase inhibition by free fatty acids from
Sabal serrulata fruits. Phytomedicine, 1994, 1:127–133.
50. Delos S et al. Testosterone metabolism in primary cultures of human prostate
epithelial cells and fibroblasts. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
1995, 55:375–383.
51. Rhodes L et al. Comparison of finasteride (Proscar®), a 5a-reductase inhibitor, and
various commercial plant extracts in in vitro and in vivo 5a-reductase inhibition.
Prostate, 1993, 22:43–51.
52. Iehle C et al. Human prostatic steroid 5a-reductase isoforms, a comparative study
of selective inhibitors. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 1995, 54:
273–279.
53. Weisser H et al. Effects of Sabal serrulata extract IDS 89 and its subfractions on 5areductase activity in human benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate, 1996, 28:300–306.
54. Weisser H et al. Enzyme activities in tissue of human benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH) after three months of treatment with Sabal serrulata extract IDS 89 (Strogen)
or placebo. European Urology, 1997, 31:97–101.
55. Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of Serenoa repens extract (Permixon®) on estradiol/testosterone-induced experimental prostate enlargement in the rat. Pharmacological Research, 1996, 34:171–179.
56. Otto U et al. Transplantation of human benign hyperplastic prostate tissue into nude
mice: first results of systemic therapy. Urologie Internationale, 1992, 48:167–170.
57. Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens
(Permixon) and its major components on basic fibroblast growth factor-induced
proliferation of cultures of human prostate biopsies. European Urology, 1998, 33:
340–347.
58. Vacher P et al. The lipidosterolic extract from Serenoa repens interferes with prolactin
receptor signal transduction. Journal of Biomedical Sciences, 1995, 2:357–365.
59. Goepel M et al. Saw palmetto extracts potently and noncompetitively inhibit human
a1-adrenoceptors in vitro. Prostate, 1999, 38:208–215.
60. Gabric V, Miskic H. Behandlung des benignen Prostataadenoms und der chronischen Prostatitis. Therapiewoche, 1987, 37:1775–1788.
61. Reese-Smith H et al. The value of Permixon in benign prostatic hypertrophy. British
Journal of Urology, 1986, 58:36–40.
62. Braeckman J et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of the plant extract
Serenoa repens in the treatment of benign hyperplasia of the prostate. European Journal
of Clinical Research, 1997, 9:247–259.
63. Helpap B et al. Morphology of benign prostatic hyperplasia after treatment with
sabal extract IDS 89 or placebo. Journal of Urology and Pathology, 1995, 3:175–182.

298

Fructus Serenoae Repentis
64. Di Silverio F et al. Effects of long-term treatment with Serenoa repens (Permixon®)
on the concentrations and regional distribution of androgens and epidermal growth
factor in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate, 1998, 37:77–83.
65. Anderson JT. a1-Blockers vs 5a-reductase inhibitors in benign prostatic hyperplasia:
a comparative review. Drugs and Aging, 1995, 6:388–396.
66. Grasso M et al. Comparative effects of alfuzosin versus Serenoa repens in the treatment of symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. Archivos Espanoles de Urologia,
1995, 48:97–103.
67. Adriazola Semino M et al. Tratamiento sintomatico de la hipertrofia benigna de
prostata. Estudio comparativo entre Prazosin y Serenoa repens. Archivos Espanoles de
Urologia, 1992, 45:211–213.
68. Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Serenoa repens (Bartram) J.K. Small. Fitoterapia, 1997,
68:99–113.
69. Lowe FC et al. Review of recent placebo-controlled trials utilizing phytotherapeutic agents for treatment of BPH. Prostate, 1998, 37:187–193.
70. Plosker GL, Brogden RN. Serenoa repens (Permixon®). A review of its pharmacology
and therapeutic efficacy in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Drugs and Aging, 1996, 9:
379–395.
71. De Bernardi di Valserra M, Tripodi AS, Contos S. Serenoa repens capsules: a bioequivalence study. Acta Toxicologia Therapeutica, 1994, 15:21–39.
72. Bernard P, Cousse H, Chevalier G. Distribution of radioactivity in rats after oral
administration of lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon®) supplemented
with [1-14C]-lauric acid, [1-14C] oleic acid or [4-14C] beta-sitosterol. European Journal
of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, 1997, 22:73–83.

299

Fructus Silybi Mariae

Definition
Fructus Silybi Mariae consists of the dried ripe fruits, freed from the pappus,
of Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn., Asteraceae (1, 2).

Synonyms
Carduus marianus L., Carthamus maculatum Lam., Cirsium maculatum Scop.,
Mariana mariana (L) Hill., Silybum maculatum Moench. (3, 4). Asteraceae are also
known as Compositae.

Selected vernacular names
Akùb, Artichnuat sauvage, blessed thistle, bull thistle, cardo blanco, cardo de
burro, cardo mariano, carduo mariano, chardon argente, chardon-marie, épine
blanche, Frauendistelfrüchte, fructus cardui mariae, fruit de chardon marie, holy
thistle, kharshat barri, khorfeish, kocakavkas, kuub, Lady’s milk, Lady’s thistle,
lait de Notre Dame, marian thistle, máriatövis-termés, mariazami, Mariendistel, Mariendistelfrüchte, Marienkörner, maritighal, mild marian thistle, milk
thistle, pternix, shawkeddiman, Silberdistil, silybe, silybon, silybum, St Mary’s
thistle, thistle, thistle of the Blessed Virgin, true thistle, variegated marian thistle
(3–7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to North Africa, Asia Minor, southern Europe and southern Russian
Federation; naturalized in North and South America, Australia, China and
Central Europe (3, 4).

Description
An annual or biennial herb, stem 20–150 cm high, green, glabrous or slightly
arachnoid-pubescent. Leaves alternate, large, glossy green, white-veined or
variegated, glabrous with strongly spiny margins, basal leaves (25–50 cm long,
12–25 cm wide) cauline, pinnatifid. Inflorescence large, composed of red-purple,
hermaphrodite, tubular florets gathered into a capitulum (2.5–4.0 cm in diameter), tucked in an involucre with thorny external bracts. Fruits 6–7 mm long,
composed of 6–8 hard-skinned achenes with a white, silky pappus (15–20 mm
in diameter) at apex. 2n = 34 (3, 7–12).
300

Fructus Silybi Mariae

Plant material of interest: dried ripe fruits, freed from the
pappus
General appearance
Obliquely obovoid with remainder of a flower crown on its top; 6–7 mm long,
up to 3 mm wide, 1.5 mm thick. Testa shiny brownish-black or matt greyishbrown, with dark or greyish-white dots. At the tip, there is a projecting yellowish cartilaginous, swollen ring, and at the bottom at the side, a canaliculate
hilum. Silvery pappus absent from the drug. Varieties are white, grey and black
(2, 4).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: scarcely perceptible; taste: oily, bitter (2–4).

Microscopic characteristics
Pericarp epidermis a colourless palisade layer of cells (about 75 mm long and
8 mm wide) with a strongly thickened outside wall, which reduces the lumen
in that part of the cell to a slit; subepidermal layer composed of colourless, thinwalled, parenchyma cells or groups of parenchyma cells alternating with a
variable number of pigmented cells; innermost layer mostly collapsed and containing cigar-shaped or monoclinic prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. Testa
epidermis consists of large, lemon-yellow, palisade-like, elongated cells (about
150 mm long) with striated walls and narrow lumen widening slightly at the
ends; subepidermal layers have lignified and pitted cells (2, 4).

Powdered plant material
Brownish-yellow. Fragments of colourless palisade-like epidermal cells from the
fruit wall with attached pigment layer; epidermal cells about 75 mm long and
8 mm wide; cigar-shaped or monoclinic prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate;
fragments of lemon-yellow, palisade-like testa cells about 150 mm long; fragments of embryo with thin-walled cells, small druses and lipophilic substances
(2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (2, 4), and thin-layer chromatography for the presence of marker compounds (taxifolin, silybin, silydianin and
silychristin) (2, 13).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (14).
301

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1, 2).

Total ash
Not more than 8% (1, 2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 10% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 8% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (15), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14) and
pesticide residues (16).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (14).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (14) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 1.5% silymarin, calculated as silybin, as analysed by
high-performance liquid chromatography (2). Other high-performance liquid
chromatography methods are also available (3, 17, 18).

Major chemical constituents
The major active constituents are flavonolignans (1.5–3.0%), collectively known
as silymarin. The major components of the silymarin complex are the four
302

Fructus Silybi Mariae
isomers silybin and isosilybin (a 1 : 1 mixture of diastereoisomers), silychristin
and silydianin. Other flavonolignans identified include 2,3-dehydrosilybin and
2,3-dehydrosilychristin. Taxifolin, a 2,3-dihydroflavonol, which may be regarded as the parent flavonol of the silymarin compounds, is another major marker
for Fructus Silybi Mariae (3, 4, 6–8, 19, 20). The structures of the major silymarin components and taxifolin are presented below.

O
HO

O

O

OCH3

O

2
3

O

HO

H

H

OH

OH

H

OH

H

O

OH

H

H

H

O

H

OH
silybin

OH

O

H

H

OH

OCH3
OH

silydianin
OH
O
O

HO

OH

O

H

OH

H

H

OH

2
3

OH

OCH3

H

O

HO

H
2
3

OH

OH
OH

O

silychristin

H

OH
taxifolin

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Supportive treatment of acute or chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis induced by
alcohol, drugs or toxins (21–34).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Treatment of dyspeptic complaints and gallstones (7, 35).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of amenorrhoea, constipation, diabetes, hay fever, uterine haemorrhages and varicose veins (6).

Pharmacology
Most of the biochemical and pharmacological studies have been performed
using a standardized silymarin preparation, or its major constituent, silybin.
303

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Experimental pharmacology
Antioxidant activity
Silymarin and silybin have antioxidant activity in vitro: both react with oxygenfree radicals such as hydroxyl anions, phenoxy radicals and hypochlorous acid
in various model systems such as human platelets, human fibroblasts, rat liver
microsomes and mitochondria, and using enzymatically and non-enzymatically
generated free inorganic radicals (36–42). The production of superoxide anion
radicals and nitric oxide was inhibited after treatment of isolated rat Kupffer
cells with silybin (IC50 80 mmol/l) (43). Both silymarin and silybin inhibited free
radical-induced lipid peroxidation in microsomal and mitochondrial preparations of human red blood cells, thereby stabilizing the structure of the cell
membrane (36, 44–52). Inhibition of cyclic AMP-dependent phosphodiesterase
by silybin, silydianin and silychristin has been demonstrated in vitro. Since
cyclic AMP is known to stabilize lysosomal membranes, an increase in the
concentration of this nucleoside has been proposed to be the mechanism of
membrane stabilization and thus the anti-inflammatory activity of silymarin
(53). Silybin also inhibits phospholipid synthesis and breakdown in rat liver
membranes in vitro, and corrects the alteration in phospholipid metabolism in
ethanol-treated rats (54). Both silymarin and silybin are incorporated into the
hydrophobic–hydrophilic interface of the rat microsomal membrane bilayer
and alter the structure by influencing the packing of the acyl chains
(47).
Antihepatotoxic activity
Silymarin and silybin inhibited hepatotoxicity induced by paracetamol (acetaminophen), amitriptyline, carbon tetrachloride, ethanol, erythromycin estolate,
galactosamine, nortriptyline and tert-butyl hydroperoxide in rat hepatocytes in
vitro (55–58). Silybin reduced ischaemic damage to nonparenchymal hepatic
cells and improved post-ischaemic function in pig livers (59). Allyl alcoholinduced toxicity, and associated lipid peroxidation and glutathione depletion
were suppressed after treatment of isolated rat hepatocytes with silymarin and
silybin at concentrations of 0.1 and 1.0 mmol/l, respectively (60).
Silybin stimulated macromolecular biosynthesis in vitro and in vivo (61–64).
Silybin increased the rate of ribosomal RNA synthesis by 20% in rat liver, cultured hepatocytes and isolated liver nuclei, via activation of DNA-dependent
RNA polymerase I (63). Silybin binds to the regulatory subunit of DNAdependent RNA polymerase I at the estrogen binding site, thereby acting as
a natural steroid effector, and thus activating the enzyme and increasing the
rate of ribosomal RNA synthesis (64). Silybin had no effect on the transcription of RNA polymerase II or III. The increase of ribosomal RNA synthesis
in the liver stimulates the formation of mature ribosomes, and hence protein
biosynthesis (63). Furthermore, an increase in DNA synthesis was observed in
livers from hepatectomized rats treated with silybin (27 mg/kg body weight)
(65).
304

Fructus Silybi Mariae
Intraperitoneal or intragastric administration of silymarin (15–800 mg/kg
body weight) to dogs, mice and rats prevented carbon tetrachloride-induced
liver damage (46, 66–68). This effect of silymarin was attributed to its antioxidant activity, a decrease in the metabolic activation of carbon tetrachloride,
and stabilization of hepatocyte membranes (46, 66, 67, 69). Intragastric administration of silymarin (50 mg/kg body weight) improved the metabolism and
tissue distribution of aspirin in rats with carbon tetrachloride-induced liver toxicity (70). Intraperitoneal administration of either silymarin or silybin markedly
inhibited liver damage induced by paracetamol (acetaminophen), Amanita
phalloides toxins (e.g. phalloidin and a-amanitin), ethanol, galactosamine,
halothane, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, rare earth metals (e.g. cerium,
praseodymium and lanthanum) and thallium in various rodent models (50,
71–81). Furthermore, intravenous administration of silybin hemisuccinate
sodium salt (50 mg/kg body weight) to dogs given sublethal doses of Amanita
phalloides (85 mg/kg body weight) prevented the increase in concentration of
liver enzymes in the blood and the decrease in clotting factors (82). The uptake
of [3H]dimethyl phalloidin in isolated rat hepatocytes was inhibited by 79% in
cells treated with silybin ester (100 mg/ml) (73). However, intravenous administration of silybin (50 mg/kg body weight) to rats inhibited the protective effect
of ethanol on paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity. The combination of ethanol
and silybin appeared to lead to inhibition of paracetamol metabolism by microsomes (83). Intravenous administration of silybin hemisuccinate sodium salt
(50 mg/kg body weight) to mice preinfected with sublethal doses of frog virus
3 attenuated histological changes in hepatocyte nuclei; animals treated with a
lethal dose of frog virus 3 showed increased survival times (84–86).
Intragastric administration of silymarin (50 mg/kg body weight) to rats
inhibited collagen accumulation in early and advanced biliary fibrosis secondary
to complete bile duct occlusion induced by sodium amidotrizoate (87). Silymarin increased the redox state and the total glutathione content in the liver,
intestine and stomach of rats after intraperitoneal administration (200 mg/kg
body weight) (42, 88).
In a transplantation experiment, explanted pig liver was subjected to coldinduced ischaemia by storage of the liver at 4°C for 24 hours, followed by extracorporeal reperfusion for 4 hours. Intravenous administration of 500 mg silybin
ester prior to removal of the liver, followed by 400 mg/l during cold storage and
100 mg/h during reperfusion, reduced histological damage to the liver cells
(measured by bile production) and improved liver function during reperfusion
by 24–66% (measured by bile acid excretion) (59).
Anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic activity
Silybin inhibited neutrophil-mediated histamine release induced by f-met
peptide and anti-IgE from human basophil leukocytes. The inhibitory effect
was significantly attenuated (P < 0.05) by elevating the extracellular calcium
concentration. However, no effect was observed on histamine release induced
by the calcium ionophore A23187 (89). Silymarin inhibited neutrophil305

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
mediated histamine release activated by N-formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine from rat peritoneal mast cells at a concentration of 25 mg/ml (90). Silybin
inhibited the synthesis of leukotriene B4 (IC50 15 mmol/l) in isolated rat Kupffer
cells, but had no effect on prostaglandin E2 formation at concentrations up to
100 mmol/l (43). Silymarin, silybin, silydianin and silychristin inhibited the
activity of lipoxygenase and prostaglandin synthetase in vitro (91–93). The antiinflammatory activity of silybin was assessed in human polymorphonuclear
leukocytes in vitro. The chemotactic and phagocytic activities of the polymorphonuclear leukocytes were not modified by silybin at concentrations of
0.5–25.0 mg/ml. However, the compound did inhibit luminol-enhanced chemiluminescence, suggesting that the mechanism of anti-inflammatory activity
involved the inhibition of hydrogen peroxide formation (94). Intragastric
administration of silymarin reduced carrageenan-induced footpad oedema in
rats (ED50 62.42 mg/kg body weight). Topical application of silymarin inhibited
xylene-induced ear inflammation in mice, and its activity was similar to that of
indometacin (25 mg/kg body weight). In addition, silymarin inhibited leukocyte
accumulation in inflammatory exudates following intraperitoneal administration of carrageenan to mice (95).
Intragastric administration (25–1000 mg/kg body weight) of an acetone
extract of the fruit containing silybin increased the volume and dry mass of
excreted bile in rats (96). Intragastric administration of silymarin (100 mg/kg
body weight) prevented gastric ulceration in rats induced by cold-restraint and
pyloric ligation, but was not effective against ethanol-induced ulcers (97). Intragastric administration of silymarin (100 mg/kg body weight) to rats prevented
gastric injury induced by ischaemia-reperfusion (98).

Clinical pharmacology
Alcohol-induced hepatitis
The efficacy of a standardized silymarin preparation for the treatment of
alcohol-induced cirrhosis was assessed in six placebo-controlled clinical trials
(24–27, 31, 33, 99). The majority of these studies involved between 50 and 100
patients, with one study including 170 patients (26). Patients generally received
an oral dose of 280–420 mg (140 mg two or three times daily) of a standardized silymarin preparation or placebo. One of the studies had a treatment
period of up to 4 years, and used survival rates as their outcome parameter.
The results of this study showed a significant decrease in the mortality of
patients treated with silymarin as compared with placebo (P < 0.05) (26). After
treatment with the silymarin preparation (140 mg twice daily), a decrease in
total bilirubin, liver enzymes and serum N-terminal propeptide of collagen
type III levels was observed (25). A 6-month trial that was also double-blind
assessed the efficacy of silymarin in patients who had histological documentation of chronic alcoholic hepatitis. Silymarin treatment improved histology,
and lymphocyte proliferation and lipid peroxidation (24). In two studies that
were also randomized and double-blind, treatment of 163 patients with the
306

Fructus Silybi Mariae
silymarin preparation decreased serum levels of liver enzymes, improved
liver function, and returned sulfobromophthalein levels to normal, as compared with placebo (27, 31). Another trial that was also randomized and doubleblind analysed the effects of silymarin in 116 patients with alcohol-induced
hepatitis, 58 of whom had liver cirrhosis. Patients received 420 mg silymarin or
placebo daily for 3 months. A significant improvement was noted in both
groups (P < 0.05); however, silymarin was not more effective than placebo
(99).
Five double-blind clinical trials assessed the efficacy of silymarin in the treatment of various chronic liver diseases induced by alcohol (22, 23, 25, 29, 30).
In four of these trials, treatment of patients with 420 mg of the silymarin preparation daily for 6 months decreased the serum levels of bilirubin, procollagen
III peptide and liver enzymes, and increased serum glutathione peroxidase
activity and lectin-induced lymphoblast transformation (23, 25, 29, 30). In the
fifth study, which was also placebo-controlled, the efficacy of silymarin was
assessed in 20 patients with various chronic liver diseases. After 13 months of
treatment (420 mg daily), histopathological findings showed improvements in
the treated group as compared with the group that received placebo (22).
In a randomized trial of 60 patients with diabetes caused by alcohol-induced
cirrhosis, patients received either 600 mg silymarin daily or no treatment for 6
months (100). The blood glucose and malondialdehyde levels, daily insulin
need and fasting insulinaemia levels were all significantly lower in treated
patients than in those that were untreated (P < 0.05), and lower than initial
baseline values (100, 101). A study without controls assessed the efficacy of a
standardized silymarin preparation (420 mg daily) in inhibiting fibrotic activity
in 277 patients with various chronic liver diseases. In liver fibrosis, the serum
level of the procollagen III peptide increases. The elevated levels of this peptide
decreased over the 4-week treatment period (102). In a drug monitoring study
without controls, 108 patients with alcohol-induced hepatotoxicity and liver
inflammation were treated with silymarin (200–400 mg/kg body weight, in a
single dose) daily for 5 weeks. After treatment, the serum procollagen III
peptide and liver enzyme levels were lower in comparison to the initial baseline values. The preparation was generally well tolerated in 98% of patients
(103). The safety and efficacy of silymarin were evaluated in over 3500 patients
in two drug-monitoring studies. In one study, 2637 patients with various liver
disorders were treated with a standardized silymarin preparation (560 mg,
given in four divided doses) daily for 8 weeks. Subjective symptoms decreased
by 63%, clinical findings improved and elevated serum levels of liver enzymes
were reduced in the treated group. Treatment was rated as very good, good or
satisfactory by 88% of the physicians (21). Minor gastrointestinal side-effects
were reported in 1% of patients (21, 28).
Acute and chronic viral hepatitis
Three controlled trials assessed the efficacy of silymarin in the treatment
of acute viral hepatitis (104–106). In a randomized, double-blind study of 57
307

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
patients with acute viral hepatitis A or B, patients received 420 mg of a standardized silymarin preparation or placebo daily for 3 weeks. In the treatment
group, 40% of patients had a normalized blood bilirubin level, as compared
with 11% of the placebo group; 82% of the treated patients had a normalized
blood level of aspartamine transaminase, as compared with 52% of the placebo
group. There was no difference between the two groups in the number of
patients who developed immunity (105). In another trial, the duration of inpatient care was shown to be shorter for patients treated with silymarin,
compared to those who received supportive care (23.3 and 30.4 days, respectively). In patients with viral hepatitis B, treatment with silymarin led to a
shorter interval to the development of immunity (30.4 days), compared to supportive therapy only (41.2 days) (104). A double-blind study in patients with
acute viral hepatitis indicated that daily treatment with 420 mg silymarin (three
doses of 140 mg) decreased the complications associated with the infection
(106).
A 12-month study combining two double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
assessed the efficacy of silymarin in the treatment of chronic hepatitis, with or
without cirrhosis, in 36 patients. Patients were treated with 420 mg of a standardized silymarin preparation or placebo daily for 3–12 months. Assessment
of serum levels of bilirubin and liver enzymes did not reveal any significant differences in liver function between the treatment and placebo groups. However,
histological improvements were noted in patients who received silymarin (107).
Organic compound-induced hepatitis
A controlled clinical study of patients with a 5–20-year history of occupational
exposure to toluene and/or xylene vapours was performed to assess the efficacy of a standardized silymarin preparation on liver function. Thirty patients
were treated orally with 140 mg of the preparation three times daily for 30 days,
and the results were compared with those from 19 untreated matched controls.
Both liver function and platelet counts markedly improved in the treated
patients (the elevated serum levels of glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase and
glutamic pyruvic transaminase were reduced, and the low platelet numbers
increased) as compared with the controls (32). In another study, the effects of
a silymarin preparation (420 mg/day) on liver function in 14 patients chronically exposed to the organophosphate malathion were assessed. After treatment, patients showed no improvement in liver function tests when compared
with the controls (10 healthy volunteers) (108).
Drug-induced hepatitis
A double-blind, placebo-controlled study assessed the efficacy of silymarin in
the prevention of hepatic damage induced by psychotropic drugs. Sixty patients
receiving chronic therapy with psychotropic drugs (butyrophenones or phenothiazines) were treated orally with 800 mg silymarin or placebo daily for 90
days. Silymarin treatment improved liver function and reduced lipoperoxida308

Fructus Silybi Mariae
tive hepatic damage as determined by serum malondialdehyde levels (the endproduct of the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids) (109). A small clinical
study found improvements in biochemical parameters in 19 patients using psychotropic drugs after 6 months of treatment with silymarin (110).
Toxin-induced hepatitis
Numerous case reports have indicated that silymarin and silybin are effective
in the treatment of poisoning due to ingestion of the deathcap mushroom
Amanita phalloides (34, 111–114). Amanita toxins inhibit the activity of RNA
polymerase in hepatocytes, causing cell death after 12–24 hours. In a clinical
trial without controls, 60 patients were treated intravenously with silybin
(20 mg/kg body weight, daily for 1–2 days), 24–36 hours after ingestion of
Amanita phalloides. The survival rate was 100% (34). Results of a multicentre
study of 252 cases of poisoning due to ingestion of Amanita phalloides indicated
that intravenous infusion of silybin (20 mg/kg body weight, daily for 1–2 days),
in combination with the standard management techniques, dramatically
reduced mortality, without producing side-effects (111–113).
Assessment of the clinical trials of silymarin for the treatment of hepatitis
induced by alcohol, drugs or toxins, and acute and chronic viral hepatitis should
be interpreted with caution because of the small number of patients involved,
the heterogeneity of diagnoses and outcome parameters, and the inconsistent
reporting of alcohol intake by patients during the studies (115).
Pharmacokinetics
In a randomized, four-way crossover study without controls, a single dose of
102, 153, 203 or 254 mg silybin was administered orally to six healthy males.
Silybin and isosilybin concentrations in plasma were measured as unconjugated
compounds as well as total isomers after hydrolysis using high-performance
liquid chromatography. Areas under the curve were linear with the dose, and
only 10% of total silybin in the plasma was in the conjugated form. The elimination half-life of unconjugated silybin was less than 1 hour; that of total
silybin was estimated to be 6 hours. Approximately 5% of the dose was
excreted into the urine as total silybin, corresponding to a renal clearance rate
of 30 ml/min (116).
After oral administration of a single dose of 560 mg silymarin (equivalent
to 240 mg silybin) to six healthy volunteers, maximum serum concentrations
of silybin were low, ranging from 0.18 to 0.62 mg/ml. Only 1–2% of the dose
was excreted in the urine during the 24 hours following administration. After
oral administration of a single dose of 140 mg silymarin (equivalent to 60 mg
silybin) to 14 patients who had undergone cholecystectomy, bile collected from
the T-tube drains contained 11–47 mg/ml silybin, equivalent to 7–15% of the
dose, after 24 hours (117).
Following oral administration of a single dose of a standardized silymarin
preparation (140 mg) to nine patients who had undergone cholecystectomy, the
urinary and biliary excretion of silybin, silydianin and silychristin were mea309

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
sured. The urinary excretion of silybin and silychristin was insignificant. Both
silybin and silychristin were excreted in the bile in the form of sulfate and
glucuronide conjugates. The total elimination of silybin was estimated to be
20–40% and that of silychristin was 4–10%. Urinary excretion of silymarin
occurred over a 24-hour period, with maximum excretion occurring between
2 and 9 hours after administration (118).
The bioavailability of silymarin varies considerably and is dependent on the
formulation of the product (119).

Contraindications
Fructus Silybi Mariae is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of
the Asteraceae family (120).

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; carcinogenesis, mutagenesis,
impairment of fertility; teratogenic and non-teratogenic effects in pregnancy;
nursing mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore, Fructus Silybi Mariae should
not be administered during pregnancy or lactation or to children without
medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Crude drug: one case of anaphylactic shock was reported in a patient ingesting a tea prepared from Fructus Silybi Mariae (120). Standardized preparation:
a mild laxative effect has been reported (35).

Dosage forms
Usually standardized extracts for phytomedicine; crude drug for decoction (4).
Store in a well-closed container, protected from light and humidity (2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 12–15 g crude drug (35); 200–400 mg silymarin, calculated as
silybin, in standardized preparations (35).
A parenteral preparation, silybin hemisuccinate sodium salt, is available
in Germany for treatment of poisoning due to ingestion of Amanita phalloides
(111–114, 121). The total dosage is 20 mg/kg body weight, given as four infusions over a 24-hour period, with each dose administered over a 2-hour period
(121).
310

Fructus Silybi Mariae

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. Deutsches Arzneibuch. Stuttgart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 1998.
3. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hägers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
4. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
5. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names in Latin, Arabic, Armenian,
English, French, German, Italian and Turkish languages. Cairo, Argus & Papazian Press,
1936.
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
7. Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Silybum marianum (Carduus marianus). Fitoterapia, 1995,
66:3–42.
8. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
9. Leng-Peschlow E, Strenge-Hesse A. The milk thistle (Silybum marianum) and silymarin as hepatic therapeutic agents. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1991, 12:162–174.
10. Leng-Peschlow E. Properties and medical use of flavonolignans (silymarin) from
Silybum marianum. Phytotherapy Research, 1996, 10 (Suppl. 1):S25–S26.
11. Tutin TG, eds. Flora Europea. Vol. 4. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1976.
12. Hegi G, ed. Illustrierte Flora von Mittel-Europa. Vol. 6 (2. Hälfte). Munich, JF Lehmanns
Verlag, 1922.
13. Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant drug analysis, 2nd ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1995.
14. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
15. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
17. Tittel G, Wagner H. High-performance liquid chromatographic separation of silymarins and their determination in raw extracts of Silybum marianum Gaertn. Journal
of Chromatography, 1977, 135:499–501.
18. Tittel G, Wagner H. High-performance liquid chromatography of silymarin.
II. Quantitative determination of silymarin from Silybum marianum by highperformance liquid chromatography. Journal of Chromatography, 1978, 153:227–228.
19. Wagner H, Diesel P, Seitz M. The chemistry and analysis of silymarin from Silybum
marianum Gaertn. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1974, 24:466–471.
20. Wagner H et al. Silydianin and silychristin, two isomeric silymarins from
Silybum marianum (milk thistle). Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, Series B, 1976, 31:876–
880.
21. Albrecht M et al. Die Therapie toxischer Leberschäden mit Legalon®. Zeitschrift für
Klinische Medizin, 1992, 47:87–92.
22. Berenguer J, Carrasco D. Ensayo doble ciego de Silimarina frente a placebo en el
tratamiento de hepatopatías crónicas de diversa génesis. Münchener Medizinische
Wochenschrift, 1977, 119:240–260.
23. Deák G et al. Silymarin kezelés immunmoduláns hatása krónikus alkoholos
májbetegségben. Orvosi Hetilap, 1990, 131:1291–1296.
24. Feher J, Lang I. Wirkmechanismen der sogenannten Leberschutzmittel. Bayer
Internist, 1988, 4:3–7.
25. Feher J et al. Hepatoprotective activity of silymarin Legalon therapy in patients
with chronic alcoholic liver disease. Orvosi Hetilap, 1989, 130:2723–2727.
26. Ferenci P et al. Randomized controlled trial of silymarin treatment in patients with
cirrhosis of the liver. Journal of Hepatology, 1989, 9:105–113.

311

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
27. Fintelmann V, Albert A. Nachweis der therapeutischen Wirksamkeit von Legalon®
bei toxischen Lebererkrankungen im Doppelblindversuch. Therapiewoche, 1980, 30:
5589–5594.
28. Grüngreiff K et al. Nutzen der medikamentösen Lebertherapie in der
hausärztlichen Praxis. Die Medizinische Welt, 1995, 46:222–227.
29. Müzes M et al. Silymarin (Legalon®) kezelés hatása idült alkoholos májbetegek
antioxidáns védorendszerée és a lipid peroxidációra (kettos vak protokoll). Orvosi
Hetilap, 1990, 131:863–866.
30. Láng I et al. Hepatoprotective and immunomodulatory effects of antioxidant
therapy. Acta Medica Hungarica, 1988, 45:287–295.
31. Salmi HA, Sarna S. Effect of silymarin on chemical, functional, and morphological alterations of the liver. Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology, 1982, 17:517–
521.
32. Szilárd S et al. Protective effect of Legalon® in workers exposed to organic solvents.
Acta Medica Hungarica, 1988, 45:249–256.
33. Varis K et al. Die Therapie der Lebererkrankung mit Legalon: eine kontrollierte
Doppelblindstudie. In: Aktuelle Hepathologie, Third International Symposium, Cologne.
Lübeck, Hanseatisches Verlagskontor, 1978:42–43.
34. Vogel G. Natural substances with effects on the liver. In: Wagner H, Wolff P. New
natural products and plant drugs with pharmacological, biological or therapeutic activity.
New York, NY, Springer-Verlag, 1977:2651–2665.
35. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin,
TX, American Botanical Council, 1998.
36. Cavallini L, Bindoli A, Siliprandi N. Comparative evaluation of antiperoxidative
action of silymarin and other flavonoids. Pharmacological Research Communications,
1978, 10:133–136.
37. Dehmlow C, Murawski N, de Groot H. Scavenging of reactive oxygen species and
inhibition of arachidonic acid metabolism by silibinin in human cells. Life Sciences,
1996, 58:1591–1600.
38. György I, Azvedo MS, Manso C. Reactions of inorganic free radicals with liverprotecting drugs. Radiation Physical Chemistry, 1990, 36:165–167.
39. Mira ML, Azvedo MS, Manso C. The neutralization of hydroxyl radical by silibin,
sorbinil and bendazac. Free Radical Research Communications, 1987, 4:125–129.
40. Noel-Hudson MS et al. In vitro cytotoxic effects of enzymatically induced oxygen
radicals in human fibroblasts: experimental procedures and protection by radical
scavengers. Toxicology in Vitro, 1989, 3:103–109.
41. Pascual C et al. Effect of silymarin and silybin on oxygen radicals. Drug Development Research, 1993, 29:73–77.
42. Valenzuela A, Garrido A. Biochemical bases of the pharmacological action of the
flavonoid silymarin and of its structural isomer silibinin. Biological Research, 1994,
27:105–112.
43. Dehmlow C, Erhard J, De Groot H. Inhibition of Kupffer cell functions as an
explanation for the hepatoprotective properties of silibinin. Hepatology, 1996,
23:749–754.
44. Bindoli A, Cavallini L, Siliprandi N. Inhibitory action of silymarin of lipid peroxide formation in rat liver mitochondria and microsomes. Biochemical Pharmacology,
1977, 26:2405–2409.
45. Koch HP, Löffler E. Influence of silymarin and some flavonoids on lipid peroxidation in human platelets. Methods and Experimental Findings in Clinical Pharmacology,
1985, 7:13–18.
46. Lettéron P et al. Mechanism for the protective effects of silymarin against carbon
tetrachloride-induced lipid peroxidation and hepatotoxicity in mice. Biochemical
Pharmacology, 1990, 39:2027–2034.

312

Fructus Silybi Mariae
47. Parasassi T et al. Drug-membrane interactions: silymarin, silibyn and microsomal
membranes. Cell Biochemistry and Function, 1984, 2:85–88.
48. Ramellini G, Meldolesi J. Stabilization of isolated rat liver plasma membranes by
treatment in vitro with silymarin. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1974, 24:806–808.
49. Valenzuela A et al. Inhibitory effect of the flavonoid silymarin on the erythrocyte
hemolysis induced by phenylhydrazine. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 1985, 126:712–718.
50. Valenzuela A et al. Silymarin protection against hepatic lipid peroxidation induced
by acute ethanol intoxication in the rat. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1985, 34:2209–
2212.
51. Valenzuela A, Guerra R. Differential effect of silybin on the Fe2+-ADP and t-butyl
hydroperoxide-induced microsomal lipid peroxidation. Experientia, 1986, 42:139–
141.
52. Valenzuela A, Guerra R, Garrido A. Silybin dihemisuccinate protects rat erythrocytes against phenylhydrazine-induced lipid peroxidation and hemolysis. Planta
Medica, 1987, 53:402–405.
53. Koch HP et al. Silymarin: potent inhibitor of cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase.
Methods and Experimental Findings in Clinical Pharmacology, 1985, 7:409–413.
54. Castigli E et al. The activity of silybin on phospholipid metabolism of normal and
fatty liver in vivo. Pharmacological Research Communications, 1977, 9:59–69.
55. Davila JC, Lenherr A, Acosta D. Protective effect of flavonoids on drug-induced
hepatotoxicity in vitro. Toxicology, 1989, 57:267–286.
56. Hikino H et al. Antihepatotoxic actions of flavonolignans from Silybum marianum
fruits. Planta Medica, 1984, 50:248–250.
57. Joyeux M et al. Tert-butyl hydroperoxide-induced injury in isolated rat hepatocytes:
a model for studying anti-hepatotoxic crude drugs. Planta Medica, 1990, 56:171–
174.
58. Ramellini G, Meldolesi J. Liver protection by silymarin: in vitro effect on dissociated rat hepatocytes. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1976, 26:69–73.
59. Blumhardt G et al. Silibinin reduces ischemic damage to nonparenchymal cells and
improves post-ischemic liver function of UW-preserved porcine livers. Zeitschrift für
Gastroenterologie, 1994, 32:59 (abstract).
60. Miguez MP et al. Hepatoprotective mechanism of silymarin: no evidence for
involvement of cytochrome P450 2E1. Chemico–biological Interactions, 1994, 91:51–
63.
61. Machicao F, Sonnenbichler J. Mechanism of the stimulation of RNA synthesis in
rat liver nuclei by silybin. Hoppe-Seyler’s Zeitschrift für Physiologische Chemie, 1977,
358:141–147.
62. Sonnenbichler J, Mattersberger J, Rosen H. Stimulierung der RNA-Synthese in Rattenleber und in isolierten Hepatozyten durch Silybin, einen antihepatotoxischen
Wirkstoff aus Silybum marianum L. Gaertn. Hoppe-Seyler’s Zeitschrift für Physiologische Chemie, 1976, 357:1171–1180.
63. Sonnenbichler J, Zetl I. Stimulating influence of a flavonolignane derivative on proliferation, RNA synthesis and protein synthesis in liver cells. In: Okolicsanyi L et
al., eds. Assessment and management of hepatobiliary disease. Berlin, Springer-Verlag,
1987:265–272.
64. Sonnenbichler J, Zetl I. Biochemistry of a liver drug from the thistle Silybum
marianum. Planta Medica, 1992, 58 (Suppl.): A580–A581.
65. Sonnenbichler J et al. Stimulatory effect of silibinin on the DNA synthesis in partially hepatectomized rat livers: non-response in hepatoma and other malign cell
lines. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1986, 35:538–541.
66. Martin R et al. Hepatic regeneration drugs in dogs: effect of choline and silibin in
dogs with liver damage. Veterinary Medicine, 1984, April: 504–510.

313

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
67. Mourelle M et al. Prevention of CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis by silymarin. Fundamentals of Clinical Pharmacology, 1989, 3:183–191.
68. Muriel P, Mourelle M. Prevention by silymarin of membrane alterations in acute
CCl4-induced liver damage. Journal of Applied Toxicology, 1990, 10:275–279.
69. Muriel P, Mourelle M. The role of membrane composition in ATPase activities of
cirrhotic rat liver: effect of silymarin. Journal of Applied Toxicology, 1990, 10:281–284.
70. Mourelle M, Favari L. Silymarin improves metabolism and disposition of aspirin
in cirrhotic rats. Life Sciences, 1989, 43:201–207.
71. Barbarino F et al. Effect of silymarin on experimental liver lesions. Revue roumaine
de Médecine, 1981, 19:347–357.
72. Campos R et al. Silybin dihemisuccinate protects against glutathione depletion and
lipid peroxidation induced by acetaminophen on rat liver. Planta Medica, 1989,
55:417–419.
73. Faulstich H, Jahn W, Wieland T. Silybin inhibition of amatoxin uptake in the perfused rat liver. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1980, 30:452–454.
74. Janiak B. Die Hemmung der Lebermikrosomenaktivität bei der Maus nach einmaliger Halothannarkose und seine Beeinflussbarkeit durch Silybin (Silymarin).
Anaesthesist, 1974, 23:389–393.
75. Meiss R et al. Effect of silybin on hepatic cell membranes after damage by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). Agents and Actions, 1982, 12:254–257.
76. Mourelle M, Favari L, Amezcua JL. Protection against thallium hepatotoxicity by
silymarin. Journal of Applied Toxicology, 1988, 8:351–354.
77. Strubelt O, Siegers C-P, Younes M. The influence of silybin on the hepatotoxic
and hypoglycemic effects of praseodymium and other lanthanides. ArzneimittelForschung, 1980, 30:1690–1694.
78. Trost W, Lang W. Effect of thioctic acid and silibinin on the survival rate in
amanitin- and phalloidin-poisoned mice. IRCS Medical Science, 1984, 12:1079–
1080.
79. Tuchweber B et al. Prevention of praseodymium-induced hepatotoxicity by silybin.
Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 1976, 38:559–570.
80. Tyutyulkova N et al. Hepatoprotective effect of silymarin (Carsil) on liver of Dgalactosamine-treated rats. Biochemical and morphological investigations. Methods
and Findings in Experimental Clinical Pharmacology, 1981, 3:71–77.
81. Wang M et al. Hepatoprotective properties of Silybum marianum herbal preparation
on ethanol-induced liver damage. Fitoterapia, 1996, 67:166–171.
82. Floersheim GL et al. Effects of penicillin and silymarin on liver enzymes and blood
clotting factors in dogs given a boiled preparation of Amanita phalloides. Toxicology
and Applied Pharmacology, 1978, 46:455–462.
83. Garrido A et al. The flavonoid silybin ameliorates the protective effect of ethanol
on acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. Research Communications in Substances of Abuse,
1989, 10:193–196.
84. Elharrar M et al. Ein neues Modell der experimentellen toxischen Hepatitis.
Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1975, 25:1586–1591.
85. Gendrault JL et al. Wirkung eines wasserlöslichen Derivates von Silymarin auf die
durch Frog-Virus 3 an Mäusehepatozyten hervorgerufenen morphologischen und
funktionellen Veränderungen. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1979, 29:786–791.
86. Steffan AM, Kirn A. Multiplication of vaccinia virus in the livers of mice after frog
virus 3-induced damage to sinusoidal cells. Journal of the Reticuloendothelial Society,
1979, 26:531–538.
87. Boigk G et al. Silymarin retards collagen accumulation in early and advanced biliary
fibrosis secondary to complete bile duct obliteration in rats. Hepatology, 1997, 26:
643–649.
88. Valenzuela A et al. Selectivity of silymarin on the increase of the glutathione
content in different tissues of the rat. Planta Medica, 1989, 55:420–422.

314

Fructus Silybi Mariae
89. Miadonna A et al. Effects of silybin on histamine release from human basophil
leucocytes. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 1987, 24:747–752.
90. Fantozzi R et al. FMLP-activated neutrophils evoke histamine release from mast
cells. Agents and Actions, 1986, 18:155–158.
91. Baumann J, Wurm G, von Bruchhausen F. Hemmung der Prostaglandinsynthetase durch Flavonoide und Phenolderivate im Vergleich mit deren O2Radikalfängereigenschaften. Archiv der Pharmazie (Weinheim), 1980, 313:330–337.
92. Fiebrich F, Koch H. Silymarin, an inhibitor of lipoxygenase. Experientia, 1979,
35:1548–1550.
93. Fiebrich F, Koch H. Silymarin, an inhibitor of prostaglandin synthetase. Experientia, 1979, 35:1550–1552.
94. Minonzio F et al. Modulation of human polymorphonuclear leukocyte function by
the flavonoid silybin. International Journal of Tissue Reactions, 1988, 10:223–231.
95. De La Puerta R et al. Effect of silymarin of different acute inflammation models
and on leukocyte migration. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1996, 48:969–
970.
96. Danielak R, Popowska E, Borkowski B. The preparation of vegetable products containing isofraxidin, silibin, and Glaucium alkaloids and evaluation of their choleretic
action. Polish Pharmacology and Pharmacy, 1973, 25:271–283.
97. Alarcón de la Lastra C et al. Gastric anti-ulcer activity of silymarin, a lipoxygenase
inhibitor, in rats. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1992, 44:929–931.
98. Alarcón de la Lastra C et al. Gastroprotection induced by silymarin, the hepatoprotective principle of Silybum marianum in ischemia-reperfusion mucosal injury:
role of neutrophils. Planta Medica, 1995, 61:116–119.
99. Trinchet JC et al. Traitement de l’hépatite alcoolique par la silymarine. Une étude
comparative en double insu chez 116 malades. Gastroenterologie clinique et biologie,
1989, 13:120–124.
100. Velussi M et al. Silymarin reduces hyperinsulinemia, malondialdehyde levels, and
daily insulin need in cirrhotic diabetic patients. Current Therapeutic Research, 1993,
53:533–544.
101. Velussi M et al. Long-term (12 months) treatment with an antioxidant drug
(silymarin) is effective on hyperinsulinemia, exogenous insulin need and malondialdehyde levels in cirrhotic diabetic patients. Journal of Hepatology, 1997, 26:871–
879.
102. Held C. Fibrose-Hemmung unter Praxisbedingen. Therapiewoche, 1992, 42:1696–
1701.
103. Held C. Therapie der toxischen Hepatopathien. Mariendistel verringert Fibroseaktivität. Therapiewoche, 1993, 43:2002–2009.
104. Cavalieri S. Kontrollierte klinische Pruefung von Legalon. Gazzette Medica Italiana,
1974, 133:628.
105. Magliulo E et al. Zur Wirkung von Silymarin bei der Behandlung der akuten
Virushepatitis. Medizinische Klinik, 1978, 73:1060–1065.
106. Plomteux G et al. Hepatoprotector action of silymarin in human acute viral hepatitis. International Research Communications Systems, 1977, 5:259–261.
107. Kiesewetter E et al. Ergebnisse zweier Doppelblindstudien zur Wirksamkeit von
Silymarin bei chronischer Hepatitis. Leber, Magen, Darm, 1977, 7:318–323.
108. Boari C et al. Silymarin in the protection against exogenous noxae. Drugs in Experimental Clinical Research, 1981, 7:115–120.
109. Palasciano G et al. The effect of silymarin on plasma levels of malondialdehyde in
patients receiving long-term treatment with psychotrophic drugs. Current Therapeutic Research, 1994, 55:537–545.
110. Saba P et al. Effetti terapeutici della silimarina nelle epatopatie croniche indotte da
psicofarmaci. Gazzetta Medica Italiana, 1976, 135:236–251.
111. Floersheim GL et al. Clinical deathcap (Amanita phalloides) poisoning: prognostic

315

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
factors and therapeutic measures. Analysis of 205 cases. Schweizerische Medizinische Wochenschrift, 1982, 112:1164–1177.
112. Hruby C. Silibinin in the treatment of deathcap fungus poisoning. Forum, 1984, 6:
23–26.
113. Hruby C et al. Pharmakotherapie der Knollenblätterpilzvergiftung mit Silibinin.
Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift, 1983, 95:225–231.
114. Vogel G. The anti-Amanita effect of silymarin. In: Faulstich H et al., eds. Amanita
toxins and poisonings. International Amanita symposium. Baden-Baden, Gerhard &
Witzstrock, 1980:180–189.
115. Flora K et al. Milk thistle (Silybum marianum) for the therapy of liver disease.
American Journal of Gastroenterology, 1998, 93:139–143.
116. Weyhenmeyer R, Mascher H, Birkmayer J. Study on dose-linearity of the pharmacokinetics of silibinin diastereomers using a new stereospecific assay. International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 1992, 30:134–138.
117. Lorenz D et al. Pharmacokinetic studies with silymarin in human serum and bile.
Methods and Experimental Findings in Clinical Pharmacology, 1984, 6:655–661.
118. Flory PJ et al. Studies on elimination of silymarin in cholecystectomized patients.
I. Biliary and renal elimination after a single oral dose. Planta Medica, 1980, 38:
227–237.
119. Schultz HU et al. Untersuchungen zum Freisetzungsverhalten und zur
Bioäquivalenz von Silymarin-Präparaten. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1995, 45:61–64.
120. Geier J, Fuchs T, Wahl R. Anaphylaktischer Schock durch einen MariendistelExtrakt bei Soforttyp-Allergie auf Kiwi. Allergologie, 1990, 13:387–388.
121. Schultz V et al. Rational phytotherapy. A physician’s guide to herbal medicine. Berlin,
Springer-Verlag, 1997.

316

Herba Tanaceti Parthenii

Definition
Herba Tanaceti Parthenii consists of the dried leaves (1), or dried aerial parts of
Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz Bip. (Asteraceae) (2, 3).

Synonyms
Chrysanthemum parthenium (L.) Bernh., Leucanthemum parthenium (L.) Gren &
Gordon, Matricaria eximia Hort., M. parthenium L., Pyrethrum parthenium (L.) Sm.
(4–6). Asteraceae are also known as Compositae.

Selected vernacular names
Acetilla, âghovân, alfinetes de senhora, altamisa, altamisa mexicana, altamza,
amargosa, artemijio, artemijo, artmija, bachelor’s buttons, boulet, bouton d’argent, camamieri, camomilla, camoumida, camsumilha, canamelha, featherfew,
featherfoil, feather-fully, febrifuge plant, feverfew, feverfew tansy, flirtwort,
grande camomille, hierba Santa Maria, manzanilla, matricaria, matricaria
comum, midsummer daisy, Moederkruid, Mutterkraut, natsushirogiku, Santa
Maria, varadika, vettervoo (3–5, 7).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to south-east Europe, as far east as the Caucasus, but commonly
found throughout Europe and the United States of America (8, 9).

Description
A perennial plant up to 30–90 cm high. Stem up to 5 mm in diameter, more or
less branched. Leaves greenish-yellow, 2–5 cm, sometimes up to 10 cm, long;
pinnatisect to bipinnate, petiolate, alternate, more or less pubescent on both
sides. Capitula grouped in wide corymbs of 5–30 florets, each floret with long
pedicels, and 1.2–2.2 cm in diameter. Involucre in the shape of a hemisphere,
6–8 mm wide and composed of numerous partly overlapping sheathing bracts;
interior bracts narrow, obtuse, scarious and fragmented at apex; exterior bracts
oval and membranous on edges. Central hermaphrodite flowers yellow, tubiform, 5-toothed, and have 5 stamens inserted on the corolla; filaments entirely
free, but the anthers welded together in a tube, through which passes the style
317

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
with its 2 stigmatic branches. Peripheral female flowers have a white 3-toothed
ligule 2–7 mm long. Fruit an achene, 1.2–1.5 mm long, brown when mature,
with 5–10 white longitudinal ribs; glandular with a short membranous, crenulate crown (3, 5, 7, 10).

Plant material of interest: dried leaves or aerial parts
General appearance
Stem bright green, longitudinally furrowed, almost quadrangular, slightly
pubescent. Leaves pinnatisect or bipinnate, divided into 5–9 segments of which
the lamina is coarsely crenate at edge, apex obtuse, a prominent central vein to
the underside, both surfaces pubescent (1–3).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: camphorous; taste: bitter (3).

Microscopic characteristics
Epidermal cells have sinuate walls, striated cuticle and anomocytic stomata,
more frequent on the lower epidermis. Trichomes, more abundant on the lower
epidermis, of 2 types: covering trichomes uniseriate, consisting of a trapezoidal
basal cell with a striated cuticle composed of 3–5 small, rectangular, thickwalled cells, and elongated, tapering apical cells, often curved at 90° to the axis
of the basal cell; glandular trichomes slightly sunken, composed of a short, biseriate, 2- or 4-celled stalk and a biseriate head of 4 cells, around which the
cuticle forms a bladder-like covering; spherical, echinulate pollen grains about
25 mm in diameter with 3 germinal pores (1, 3).

Powdered plant material
Epidermal cells have sinuate walls and a striated cuticle. Numerous large
multicellular, uniseriate trichomes, consisting of a trapezoidal basal cell with a
striated cuticle composed of 3–5 small, rectangular, thick-walled cells, and terminated by elongated, tapering apical cells, often curved at 90° to the axis of
the basal cell. Secretory hairs sparse, but typical of Asteraceae family. Numerous punctate spiral vessels; stratified parenchyma or collenchyma cells; isolated
calcium oxalate crystals in the interior of the mesophyll (3).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, thin-layer chromatography, and
high-performance liquid chromatography for the presence of parthenolide
(1, 3).
318

Herba Tanaceti Parthenii

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (11).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 10%, including stems greater than 5 mm in diameter (1, 3).

Total ash
Not more than 12% (1, 3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 3% (1, 2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 15% (2).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (1, 3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (12). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (12), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (11) and
pesticide residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (11).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (11) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.2% parthenolide (dry weight), as determined by highperformance liquid chromatography (3).
319

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Major chemical constituents
The major constituent is parthenolide (up to 0.9%), a germacranolide sesquiterpene lactone (14–16). Parthenolide and other characteristic sesquiterpene lactones, including members of the guaianolides (e.g. canin and artecanin), contain
an a-methylenebutyrolactone structure. To date, more than 45 sesquiterpenes
have been identified in Herba Tanaceti Parthenii. Monoterpenes, flavonoids and
polyacetylenes have also been detected (1, 4, 10, 12, 17–19). The structures of
the representative sesquiterpene lactones, parthenolide, 3b-hydroxyparthenolide, canin and artecanin, are presented below.
CH3

O
H

H

O
O

O

H
H

H 3C
O

H

H
H

H

CH2

O
H3C
O

H

H
H

H
H

parthenolide

CH2

O

R
H3C

O

CH2

R = H

O

CH3

OH
artecanin

H

O

OH
canin

CH3

3b-hydroxyparthenolide R = OH

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Prevention of migraine (20–24). Although Herba Tanaceti Parthenii has been
used for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, a clinical study failed to prove any
beneficial effects (25).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and traditional systems
of medicine
None.

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of anaemia, arthritis, asthma, common cold, constipation, diarrhoea,
dysmenorrhoea, dyspepsia, oedema, fever, indigestion, insect bites, rheumatism, sciatica, tinnitus, toothache and vertigo (4, 26–30).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Prevention and treatment of migraine
The mechanism of action of Herba Tanaceti Parthenii in the prevention of
migraine is currently a matter of debate (27, 31, 32). However, based on
320

Herba Tanaceti Parthenii
pharmacological studies of the herb and parthenolide, the mechanism appears
to be threefold: antiinflammatory activity, an effect on platelets and inhibition of serotonin binding.
Anti-inflammatory activity
Extracts of the herb and parthenolide both inhibit the biosynthesis of prostaglandins, leukotrienes and thromboxanes, collectively known as eicosanoids, which are potent mediators of inflammation. An aqueous extract of
the herb (50 mg/ml) inhibited the activity of lipoxygenase in rat leukocytes in
vitro, thereby reducing the biosynthesis of prostaglandins and thromboxane B2
(33). A chloroform extract of the leaves (IC50 < 50 mg/ml) inhibited the biosynthesis in vitro of leukotriene B4 and thromboxane B2 in human and rat leukocytes which had been stimulated by N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine
or the calcium ionophore A23187 (34). The powdered leaf inhibited arachidonic
acid metabolism in Pseudomonas fluorescens in vitro (35). A buffered aqueous
extract of the leaves (pH 7.4) inhibited the activity of phospholipase A2 in
human platelets in vitro (30 ml). Phospholipase A2 facilitates the release of
arachidonic acid (the precursor of the eicosanoids) from the cell membrane (36).
The extract was also shown to prevent both arachidonic acid release and
metabolism in human platelets in vitro (36, 37). A chloroform–methanol extract
of the leaves (100 ml) inhibited the release of vitamin B12-binding protein in vitro
from human polymorphonuclear leukocytes induced by N-formyl-methionylleucyl-phenylalanine or sodium arachidonate (38). An acetone, chloroform or
saline extract of the leaves (IC50 0.79 mg/ml) inhibited oxidative burst in vitro
in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes induced by phorbol 12-myristate 13acetate (39, 40). A chloroform extract of the leaves inhibited histamine release
in vitro in rat peritoneal mast cells stimulated by anti-IgE antibodies or the
calcium ionophore A23187 (41). Parthenolide inhibited gene expression in vitro
of cyclooxygenase and the proinflammatory cytokines, tumour necrosis factora and interleukin-1, in murine macrophages stimulated by lipopolysaccharide.
Parthenolide also suppressed protein tyrosine phosphorylation in these cells,
which correlated with its inhibitory effect on the expression of cyclooxygenase
and the cytokines (42).
Effect on platelets
Another possible mechanism of action of the herb and its constituent sesquiterpene lactones involves the inhibition of platelet aggregation and serotonin
release from platelets in response to various chemical stimuli (27, 43–45).
Aqueous, chloroform or chloroform–methanol extracts of the leaves (up to
100 ml) inhibited human platelet aggregation in vitro induced by arachidonic
acid, collagen or adrenalin (35, 36, 38, 44, 46, 47). A chloroform extract of the
fresh leaves of Tanaceti parthenium completely inhibited human platelet aggregation in vitro. After fractionation of the extract, only fractions containing
constituents with an a-methylenebutyrolactone functional group were active.
321

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
Parthenolide was the most active; canin, tanaparthin-a-peroxide and ciscycloheptane lactone ester were partially active (48). Although the exact mechanism by which these compounds affect platelet function is unknown, it has
been suggested that their ability to undergo Michael addition with thiol groups
may influence their biological activity (48). The following evidence supports
this hypothesis: addition of cysteine or 2-mercaptoethanol to the crude extract
or parthenolide completely suppressed their ability to inhibit platelet aggregation. Furthermore, the inhibitory effects of the extract and parthenolide
were both dose- and time-dependent, and treatment of platelets with the
extract or parthenolide caused a dramatic reduction in the number of thiol
groups (44, 45, 48). Acetone, chloroform or chloroform–methanol extracts of
the leaves (100 ml) inhibited serotonin release in vitro from human platelets
and polymorphonuclear leukocytes stimulated by arachidonic acid, adenosine
diphosphate, collagen and adrenalin (38, 46, 47). A chloroform–methanol
extract did not, however, inhibit serotonin release from human platelets or
polymorphonuclear leukocytes stimulated by the calcium ionophore A23187
(38). A 95% ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited serotonin release from
bovine platelets in vitro (IC50 1.3–2.9 mg/ml) (49). The ability of freeze-dried
or air-dried aqueous leaf extracts to inhibit serotonin release from human
platelets correlated with the concentration of parthenolide in the extracts
(16, 32).
Inhibition of serotonin binding
Current evidence also indicates that serotonin receptor-based mechanisms are
involved in the pathophysiology of migraine. In vitro studies have demonstrated that parthenolide displaces radioligand binding from cloned serotonin
receptors and from serotonin receptors isolated from rat and rabbit brains, indicating that parthenolide may be a low-affinity antagonist (50).
A chloroform extract of the fresh leaves of Tanacetum parthenium inhibited
the contractile response of isolated rings of rabbit aorta to exogenously applied
serotonin-receptor agonists (serotonin, angiotensin, phenylephrine, thromboxane mimetic U48819 or thromboxane A2) (51, 52). However, a chloroform
extract of the dried leaves which did not contain parthenolide or other
sesquiterpene lactones was not active (52).
Toxicology
An in vitro study demonstrated that an extract of the herb or parthenolide
was cytotoxic to human peripheral blood mononuclear cells induced by mitogens and synovial cells stimulated by interleukin-1 (53). Parthenolide-induced
cytotoxicity was due to the inhibition of thymidine incorporation into DNA
(54, 55). Intragastric administration of 100 times the normal daily dose for
humans of powdered leaf to rats did not result in loss of appetite or weight
(19).
322

Herba Tanaceti Parthenii

Clinical pharmacology
Migraine
Five randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies have assessed the
efficacy of various Herba Tanaceti Parthenii products for the prevention of
migraine (21–23, 56, 57). Three of the trials used an encapsulated dried or
freeze-dried leaf product (21–23), while one study used a 90% ethanol extract
of the herb bound to microcrystalline cellulose (56). The remaining study was
reported only as an abstract and the herb preparation used was not defined (57).
These five trials were analysed recently by two independent reviewers (24).
The data were analysed in a predefined, standardized fashion, and each trial
was assessed using the Jadad scoring system. Although the data would suggest
that the herb was more effective than a placebo in preventing migraine, a firm
conclusion could not be reached given the shortcomings of the trials (such as
small sample size, poor definition of inclusion criteria and lack of washout
period) (24).
In the first study, 17 patients who had been treating themselves with the
fresh leaves of Tanacetum parthenium for 3–4 years for migraine were recruited.
Patients were administered an oral dose of 50 mg (concentration of parthenolide
was not stated) of a freeze-dried leaf preparation or a placebo daily for 6 months.
The average number of migraines in the treatment group was 1.69 over the
whole treatment period and 1.50 during the final 3 months of the study, compared with 3.13 and 3.43, respectively, in the placebo group (21). Bouts of nausea
and vomiting were reported 39 times in the treatment group, compared with 116
occasions in the placebo group. The reduction in frequency of nausea and vomiting was significant (P < 0.05) (20, 21).
In the second study, 59 patients with a history of migraine attacks were
treated daily with either an encapsulated product containing 70–114 mg leaves
(equivalent to 0.545 mg parthenolide) or a placebo, after a 1-month placebo runin. During this crossover trial, patients received the leaf product for 4 months
and then a placebo for 4 months. During the treatment phase, a 24% decrease
was reported in the number of migraines in the treatment group as compared
with the number in the placebo group. No change in the duration of the migraine
or in the proportion of attacks associated with an aura was observed in the treatment group. However, a significant reduction in the number of bouts of nausea
and vomiting associated with the migraine was reported (P < 0.02). Global
assessments of efficacy also demonstrated that the leaf product was significantly
superior to the placebo in preventing migraines (P < 0.0001) (22).
In the third study, 57 patients were divided into two groups for the initial openlabel phase. Patients were treated with either a placebo or 100 mg encapsulated
leaf preparation (standardized to contain 0.2 mg parthenolide) daily for 60 days.
After the open-label phase, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study was carried out. Patients were again divided into two groups: 30
patients continued to receive 100 mg leaf preparation and 27 patients received a
placebo. After 30 days, the treatments were crossed over (i.e. patients who had
323

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
received the placebo were then given the leaf preparation, or vice versa) for a
further 30 days. No washout period was allowed between each phase. Results of
the open-label phase showed a significant reduction in pain intensity of migraines
and symptoms such as vomiting, or sensitivity to light or noise in patients in the
treatment group (P < 0.001). In the double-blind phase, patients in the treatment
group reported a significant decrease in the pain intensity of migraines (P < 0.01),
while patients in the placebo group noted an increase. Similar results were
reported after the crossover. In the double-blind phase, a significant decrease in
vomiting (P < 0.001) and light- and noise-sensitivity (P < 0.017) was observed in
the treatment group compared with the placebo group (23).
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study assessed
the efficacy of a 90% ethanol extract of the herb bound to microcrystalline cellulose in the prevention of migraine headache in 44 patients. Diagnosis was
carried out using the International Headache Society diagnostic criteria. After
an initial 1-month placebo run-in, patients were treated with either 143 mg
extract standardized to contain 0.5 mg parthenolide or placebo daily for 4
months, then the treatments were crossed over for a further 4 months (56). The
average response to the two treatments was the same and the extract did not
prevent migraines. Statistical significance was not reported.
A study without controls demonstrated that platelet aggregation in 10
patients who had taken preparations of the herb for 3.5–8.0 years was the same
as in a control group of four patients who had stopped taking the herb for at
least 6 months prior to being tested (58).
Rheumatoid arthritis
A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the efficacy of the herb for the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Forty women with rheumatoid arthritis were
treated with either 70–86 mg of an encapsulated leaf product or a placebo daily
for 6 weeks. No beneficial effects were observed (25).

Contraindications
Herba Tanaceti Parthenii is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants
of the Asteraceae family, and during pregnancy (1, 19, 28).

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No significant differences were observed in the mean frequency of chromosomal aberrations or sister-chromatid exchange in the circulating peripheral lym-

324

Herba Tanaceti Parthenii
phocytes of 30 patients who had taken Herba Tanaceti Parthenii for 11 months
or longer. Urine samples from these patients did not induce a significant
increase in the number of revertants in the Salmonella/microsome assay with
or without metabolic activation (59).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications. The use of Herba Tanaceti Parthenii during pregnancy
is contraindicated due to its uterotonic activity in vivo (19, 28).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; nursing mothers; or paediatric use. Therefore, Herba Tanaceti Parthenii should not be administered
during lactation or to children without medical supervision.

Adverse reactions
Dizziness, heartburn, indigestion, inflammation of the mouth and tongue with
swelling of the lips, loss of taste, mouth ulceration, and weight gain have been
reported (19, 21, 22). Mouth ulceration is a systemic reaction to Herba Tanaceti
Parthenii and requires discontinuation of the product. Inflammation of the
mouth and tongue with swelling of the lips appears to be a local reaction that
may be overcome by using encapsulated herb products. Abdominal bloating,
heart palpitations, constipation, diarrhoea, flatulence, increased menstrual flow,
nausea and skin rashes have also been reported to a lesser degree (21, 22, 56).
Allergic reactions, such as contact dermatitis, have also been reported (19).
Cross-sensitivity between pollen allergens of other members of the Compositae family, Parthenium hysterophorus (American feverfew) and Ambrosia species
(ragweed), has been reported (60).

Dosage forms
Crude drug for decoction; powdered drug or extracts in capsules, tablets, tinctures and drops (2). Store in a well-closed container, protected from light and
humidity (3).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: encapsulated crude drug equivalent to 0.2–0.6 mg parthenolide
(as a chemical marker) for prevention of migraine (21–23, 27, 32).

325

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

References
1. The United States pharmacopeia 24: national formulary 19. Rockville, MD, The United
States Pharmacopeial Convention, 1998.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medical Association, 1996.
3. Pharmacopée française. Paris, Adrapharm, 1996.
4. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
5. Hobbs C. Feverfew. Tanacetum parthenium. HerbalGram, 1989, 20:26–35.
6. Tutin TG et al., eds. Flora Europae. Vol. 4. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1976.
7. Lette C. Tanacetum parthenium. Australian Journal of Medicinal Herbalism, 1992, 4:80–85.
8. Murray MT. The healing power of herbs. Rocklin, CA, Prima, 1991.
9. Mabberley DJ. The plant book. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
10. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
11. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
12. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Awang DVC et al. Parthenolide content of feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) assessed
by HPLC and 1H-NMR spectroscopy. Journal of Natural Products, 1991, 54:1516–
1521.
15. Banthorpe DV et al. Parthenolide and other volatiles in the flowerheads of Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz Bip. Flavour and Fragrance Journal, 1990, 5:183–185.
16. Heptinstall S et al. Parthenolide content and bioactivity of feverfew (Tanacetum
parthenium (L.) Schultz Bip.). Estimation of commercial and authenticated feverfew
products. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1992, 44:391–395.
17. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 2. Elberg, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1996.
18. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
19. Hausen BM. Sesquiterpene lactones—Tanacetum parthenium. In: De Smet PAGM et
al., eds. Adverse effects of herbal drugs 1. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1994.
20. Hylands DM et al. Efficacy of feverfew as prophylactic treatment of migraine (reply).
British Medical Journal, 1985, 291:1128.
21. Johnson ES et al. Efficacy of feverfew as prophylactic treatment of migraine. British
Medical Journal, 1985, 291:569–573.
22. Murphy JJ, Heptinstall S, Mitchell JRA. Randomized double-blind placebocontrolled trial of feverfew in migraine prevention. Lancet, 1988, 8604:189–192.
23. Palevitch D, Earon G, Carasso R. Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) as a prophylactic
treatment for migraine: a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Phytotherapy
Research, 1997, 11:508–511.
24. Vogler BK et al. Feverfew as a preventative treatment for migraine: a systematic
review. Cephalagia, 1998, 18:704–708.
25. Pattrick M et al. Feverfew in rheumatoid arthritis: a double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Annals of Rheumatic Diseases, 1989, 48:547–549.
26. Berry MI. Feverfew faces the future. Pharmacy Journal, 1984, 232:611–614.
27. Heptinstall S, Awang DVC. Feverfew: a review of its history, its biology and medicinal properties, and the status of commercial preparations of the herb. In: Lawson
L, Bauer R, eds. Phytomedicines of Europe, chemistry and biological activity. Washington,
DC, American Chemical Society, 1998:158–175 (ACS Symposium Series).

326

Herba Tanaceti Parthenii
28. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for healthcare professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
29. Tyler VE. The honest herbal, 3rd ed. New York, NY, Pharmaceutical Press, 1993.
30. Pugh WJ et al. Prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors in feverfew. Journal of Pharmacy
and Pharmacology, 1988, 40:743–745.
31. Awang DVC. Parthenocide: the demise of a facile theory of feverfew activity. Journal
of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants, 1998, 5:95–98.
32. Awang DVC. Prescribing therapeutic feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz
Bip. syn. Chrysanthemum parthenium (L.) Bernh.). Integrative Medicine, 1998, 1:11–13.
33. Capasso F. The effect of an aqueous extract of Tanacetum parthenium L. on arachidonic acid metabolism by rat peritoneal leukocytes. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1986, 38:71–72.
34. Summer H et al. Inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase in leukocytes by
feverfew. Involvement of sesquiterpene lactones and other components. Journal of
Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1992, 44:737–740.
35. Loesche W et al. Effects of an extract of feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) on arachidonic acid metabolism in human blood platelets. Biomedica et Biochimica Acta, 1988,
47:5241–5243.
36. Makheja AN, Bailey JM. A platelet phospholipase inhibitor from the medicinal herb
feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium). Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Medicine, 1982, 8:
653–660.
37. Jain MK, Jahagirdar DV. Action of phospholipase A-2 on bilayers. Effects of
inhibitors. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1985, 814:319–326.
38. Heptinstall S et al. Extracts of feverfew inhibit granule secretion in blood platelets
and polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Lancet, 1985, i:1071–1074.
39. Brown AMG et al. Pharmacological activity of feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium (L.)
Schultz Bip.): assessment by inhibition of human polymorphonuclear leukocyte
chemiluminescence in vitro. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1997, 49:558–561.
40. Brown AMG et al. Effects of extracts of Tanacetum species on human polymorphonuclear leukocyte activity in vitro. Phytotherapy Research, 1997, 11:479–484.
41. Hayes NA, Foreman JC. The activity of compounds extracted from feverfew on
histamine release from rat mast cells. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1987,
39:466–470.
42. Hwang D et al. Inhibition of the expression of inducible cyclooxygenase and proinflammatory cytokines by sesquiterpene lactones in macrophages correlates with
the inhibition of MAP kinases. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications,
1996, 226:810–818.
43. Groenewegen WA, Knight DW, Heptinstall S. Compounds extracted from feverfew
that have anti-secretory activity contain an a-methylene butyrolactone unit. Journal
of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1986, 38:709–712.
44. Heptinstall S et al. Extracts of feverfew may inhibit platelet behaviour via neutralization of sulphydryl groups. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1987, 39:459–465.
45. Heptinstall S et al. Studies on feverfew and its mode of action. In: Rose FC, ed.
Advances in headache research. London, John Libbey, 1987:129–134.
46. Groenewegen WA, Heptinstall S. A comparison of the effects of an extract of feverfew and parthenolide, a component of feverfew, on human platelet activity in vitro.
Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1990, 42:553–557.
47. Heptinstall S et al. Inhibition of platelet behaviour by feverfew: a mechanism of
action involving sulphydryl groups. Folia Haematologica, 1988, 115:447–449.
48. Hewlett MJ et al. Sesquiterpene lactones from feverfew, Tanacetum parthenium: isolation, structural revision, activity against human blood platelet function and implication for migraine therapy. Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin Transactions I, 1996,
16:1979–1986.

327

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
49. Marles RJ et al. A bioassay for inhibition of serotonin release from bovine platelets.
Journal of Natural Products, 1992, 55:1044–1056.
50. Weber JT et al. Activity of parthenolide at 5HT2A receptors. Journal of Natural Products, 1997, 60:651–653.
51. Barsby RWJ et al. Feverfew extracts and parthenolide irreversibly inhibit vascular
responses of the rabbit aorta. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1992, 44:737–740.
52. Barsby RWJ et al. Feverfew and vascular smooth muscle: extracts from fresh and
dried plants show opposing pharmacological profiles, dependent upon sesquiterpene lactone content. Planta Medica, 1993, 59:20–25.
53. O’Neill LAJ et al. Extracts of feverfew inhibit mitogen-induced human peripheral
blood mononuclear cell proliferation and cytokine-mediated responses: a cytotoxic
effect. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 1987, 23:81–83.
54. Woynarowski JW et al. Induction of deoxyribonucleic acid damage in HeLa S-3 cells
by cytotoxic and antitumor sesquiterpene lactones. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1981,
30:3305–3307.
55. Woynarowski JW et al. Inhibition of DNA biosynthesis in HeLa cells by cytotoxic
and antitumor sesquiterpene lactones. Molecular Pharmacology, 1981, 19:97–102.
56. De Weerdt, Bootsma HPR, Hendriks H. Herbal medicines in migraine prevention:
randomized double-blind placebo-controlled crossover trial of a feverfew preparation. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:225–230.
57. Kuritzky A et al. Feverfew in the treatment of migraine: its effect on serotonin
uptake and platelet activity. Neurology, 1994, 44 (Suppl. 2):293P.
58. Biggs MJ et al. Platelet aggregation in patients using feverfew for migraine. Lancet,
1982, ii:776.
59. Anderson D et al. Chromosomal aberrations and sister chromatid exchanges in lymphocytes and urine mutagenicity of migraine patients: a comparison of chronic
feverfew users and matched non-users. Human Toxicology, 1988, 7:145–152.
60. Sriramarao P, Rao PV. Allergenic cross-reactivity between Parthenium and ragweed
pollen allergens. International Archives of Allergy and Immunology, 1993, 100:79–85.

328

Radix Urticae

Definition
Radix Urticae consists of the dried roots and rhizomes of Urtica dioica L., U.
urens L. (Urticaceae), their hybrids or mixtures thereof (1, 2).

Synonyms
Urtica dioica L.
Urtica gracilis Ait., U. major Kanitz., U. urens maxima Blackw. (3, 4).

Urtica urens L.
Urtica minor Fuchs, U. minor Moench., U. urens minima Dod. (3, 4).

Selected vernacular names
Urtica dioica L.
Brennesselwurzel, common nettle, csalángyökér, gazaneh, grande ortie, greater
nettle, grosse Brennessel, Haarnesselwurzel, Hanfnesselwurzel, hhurrayq,
Nesselwurzel, nettle root, ortica, ortie, ortiga, pokrzywa, qurrays, racine
d’ortie, raiz de ortiga, stinging nettle, tsuknida, zwyczajna (4–6).

Urtica urens L.
Dwarf nettle, Eiternessel, kleine Brennessel, lesser nettle, ortica minore, ortica
piccola, ortie brulante, petite ortie, sha’reláguz, small nettle (4, 6–9).

Geographical distribution
Urtica dioica is indigenous to Africa and western Asia, but is now found in
all temperate regions of the world in Africa, North and South America, Asia,
Australia and Europe (3, 4, 6, 7, 10).
Owing to the difficulty in botanical differentiation between Urtica dioica and
U. urens in the wild, they are often harvested together. Although both species
have a similar distribution, U. urens has become less widely distributed due to
the reduction of its habitat (3).
329

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Description
Urtica dioica L.
A herbaceous perennial with erect, green to purplish square stems, 30–150 cm
high, with creeping roots; whole plant covered with stinging hairs. Leaves
opposite, cordate at the base, oblong or ovate, finely toothed; upper surface
dark green and underside paler. Flowers incomplete, small, green, dioecious
(plant has either male or female flowers in separate inflorescences) and occur
as racemes in axils of upper leaves; male or barren flowers have a perianth of
4 segments and 4 stamens, which are bent inwards at bud stage; female or
fertile flowers have similar perianth surrounding a single 1-seeded carpel,
bearing 1 style with a brush-like stigma. Fruit an achene (3, 8).

Urtica urens L.
A herbaceous annual resembling Urtica dioica, but is smaller (usually up to
30 cm high), has smaller leaves and flowers are in short, mostly unbranched
clusters; male and female flowers appear together in the same raceme. Glabrous
except for the stinging hairs (8, 11).

Plant material of interest: dried roots and rhizomes
General appearance
Rhizome cylindrical and tapering, occasionally branched, up to about 6 mm
thick at upper end; outer surface yellowish-brown; internodes with deep longitudinal furrows, numerous smooth, very thin and wiry roots arising from
the nodes; in the outer part, inner surface creamy-white with a central hollow;
fracture fibrous and tough.
Root greyish-brown, irregularly twisted, about 5 mm thick, distinct longitudinal furrows; hollow in cross-section, cut surface white; fracture fibrous and
tough (1, 7).

Organoleptic properties
Odourless; taste: faintly aromatic, characteristically bitter (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Rhizome: thin cork composed of brown, thin-walled cells, a few rows of tangentially elongated cortical parenchyma and a pericyclic region with fairly
numerous fibres; fibres usually in small groups, sometimes single; individual
fibres greatly elongated with very thick, lignified walls; some cells of pericycle
and outer part of the secondary phloem contain fairly large cluster crystals of
calcium oxalate. Cambial region distinct and continuous, with narrow radial
groups of vascular tissues separated by wide medullary rays; secondary phloem

330

Radix Urticae
mainly parenchymatous, whereas secondary xylem dense and completely lignified; medullary rays in secondary xylem show alternating areas of lignified
and unlignified cells; lignified cells have moderately thickened walls and numerous simple pits. Pith composed of rounded, unlignified parenchyma.
Root: very thin cork, narrow phelloderm and secondary phloem and xylem
with alternating areas of lignified and unlignified parenchyma in the wide
medullary rays, as in the rhizome; a strand of primary xylem in the centre with
a few small vessels (1).

Powdered plant material
Fibrous and pale beige. Fragments of greatly elongated pericyclic fibres, occurring singly or in groups, with thick and lignified walls, xylem vessels with
bordered pits, associated with thick-walled fibres with slit-shaped pits;
lignified, moderately thick-walled and pitted parenchyma from the medullary
rays of xylem; abundant thin-walled parenchymatous cells, some containing
large cluster crystals or scattered crystals of calcium oxalate; fragments of
brownish cork (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1, 2), and thin-layer chromatography for scopoletin and phytosterols (2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (12).

Foreign matter
Not more than 2% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 8% (2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 3.5% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 15% (1).

331

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12), and
pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis for heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (12) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
In addition to thin-layer chromatography for qualitative analysis (2), enzymelinked immunosorbent assay and high-performance liquid chromatography
methods have also been developed to determine the concentration of Urtica
dioica agglutinin in Radix Urticae (15, 16). However, concentration limits need
to be established.

Major chemical constituents
A large number of compounds of different polarity and belonging to various
chemical classes, including fatty acids, terpenes, phenylpropanes, lignans,
coumarins, triterpenes, ceramides, sterols and lectins, have been isolated from
Radix Urticae. Among these are oxalic acid, linoleic acid, 14-octacosanol, 13hydroxy-9-cis,11-trans-octadecadienoic acid, a-dimorphecolic acid (9-hydroxy10-trans,12-cis-octadecadienoic acid), scopoletin, p-hydroxybenzaldehyde,
homovanillyl alcohol, b-sitosterol, stigmasterol, 24-R-ethyl-5a-cholestan3b,6a-diol, campesterol, daucosterol (and related glycosides), secoisolariciresinol-9-O-b-D-glucoside, neoolivil, oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, Urtica dioica
agglutinin and polysaccharides RP1–RP5 (3–5, 10, 17–21). The structures of the
representative constituents are presented below.
332

Radix Urticae
O
ceramides

H3C

CHO
NH

n

H3C

H

O

HO
R

p-hydroxybenzaldehyde

H OH
H OH

HO

H3C

O

O

CO 2H
H3CO

a-dimorphecolic acid

scopoletin

OCH3
OH

HO

OH
and enantiomer

O

HO

H3CO
OCH3

HO

H

homovanillyl alcohol

H

CH3
H

H

neoolivil

H3C

CH3

CH3

H

O

CH3

CH3

H
H3C

H

OH

H H

H3C H

CH3

H

b-sitosterol

R = H

H

daucosterol

R = Glc

HO

R
Glc = b-D-glucopyranosyl

H
H
H3C CH3

CH3

H

CO2H

CH3

oleanolic acid

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Symptomatic treatment of lower urinary tract disorders (nocturia, polyuria,
urinary retention) resulting from BPH stages I and II, as defined by Alken, in
cases where diagnosis of prostate cancer is negative (22–35).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and traditional systems
of medicine
As a diuretic and for the treatment of rheumatism and sciatica (6).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
Treatment of asthma, coughs, dandruff, diabetes, diarrhoea, eczema, fever,
gout, haemorrhoids, nose bleeds, scurvy, snakebites and tuberculosis (5, 6). The
333

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
plant has also been used to stop uterine bleeding after childbirth, increase lactation and promote hair growth, and as a vermifuge (5, 6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-inflammatory activity
An ethanol extract of Radix Urticae inhibited the activity of human leukocyte
elastase and reduced the amount of the enzyme released by activated polymorphonuclear granulocytes during the inflammatory response. The extract
also inhibited degradation of a peptide substrate in vitro by human leukocyte
elastase (IC50 3.6 mg/ml) and bovine elastin (IC50 68 mg/ml) (36). Intragastric
administration of a polysaccharide fraction isolated from Radix Urticae to rats
(40 mg/kg body weight) suppressed carrageenan-induced footpad oedema for
up to 20 h (21, 37). The activity of the polysaccharides was comparable to that
of indometacin (10 mg/kg body weight) (21, 37).
Lymphocyte proliferation
A lyophilized aqueous extract (10 mg/ml) and a 40% alcohol extract of the roots
(100 mg/ml) stimulated human lymphocyte proliferation in vitro by 63% and
100%, respectively (21, 37). Polysaccharides isolated from an aqueous root
extract induced human lymphocyte proliferation in vitro (10–100 mg/ml) (21,
37). An ethyl acetate extract of the roots induced cell differentiation in human
promyelocytic leukaemia HL-60 cells in vitro (ED50 4 mg/ml) (38). Urtica dioica
agglutinin (500 ng/ml), however, inhibited lymphocyte proliferation and the
binding of epidermal growth factor to its receptor on A431 epidermoid cancer
cells in vitro (39). The lectin also exhibited immunomodulatory effects on
T-lymphocytes in a dose-dependent manner (21, 37). Urtica dioica agglutinin
bound to the cell membrane of prostatic hyperplastic cells (40) and inhibited
their proliferation (21).
Effect on benign prostatic hyperplasia
Effect on sex hormone-binding globulin
Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) is a blood plasma protein that binds to
circulating androgens and estrogens, thereby regulating their free concentration
in plasma. The plasma membrane of the human prostate contains specific
SHBG receptors, and SHBG appears to play a role in the development of BPH.
A 10% hydroalcoholic extract of the root reduced the binding capacity of SHBG
(isolated from human plasma) for 5a-dihydrotestosterone by 67% in vitro (41).
An aqueous extract of the root (0.6–10.0 mg/ml) inhibited the binding of
125
I-labelled SHBG to human prostate membranes in vitro (42). The lignan,
secoisolariciresinol, and a mixture of the isomeric compounds 13-hydroxy-9cis,11-trans-octadecadienoic acid and 9-hydroxy-10-trans,12-cis-octadecadienoic
acid isolated from a methanol root extract, reduced the binding of SHBG to 5a334

Radix Urticae
dihydrotestosterone (18). Secoisolariciresinol and its main intestinal transformation products, (-)-3,4-divanillyltetrahydrofuran and enterofuran, displaced
the binding of 5a-dihydrotestosterone to SHBG in vitro by 60%, 95% and 73%,
respectively (43).
Enzymatic activity
Intragastric administration of a 30% ethanol extract of the root to male
mice inhibited the activities of 5a-reductase and aromatase (ED50 14.7 and
3.58 mg/ml, respectively) (44). However, a hydroalcoholic extract of the root
dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide did not inhibit the activity of 5a-reductase from
human prostate cells in vitro (up to 500 mg/ml) (45). A standardized hydroalcoholic extract of the roots (IC50 338 mg/ml) inhibited aromatase activity in vitro.
A heptane-soluble fraction of the extract was the most effective inhibitor (IC50
9 mg/ml) (36). Both ursolic acid and 14-octacosanol isolated from a methanol
extract of the roots inhibited the activity of aromatase in vitro (46). 9-Hydroxy10-trans,12-cis-octadecadienoic acid isolated from the roots inhibited the activity of aromatase in vitro (19). Butanol, ether, ethyl acetate and hexane extracts
of the roots inhibited the activity of sodium- and potassium-adenosine triphosphatase isolated from prostatic hyperplastic cells by 27.6–81.5% (47). In addition, steroidal components of the roots, stigmast-4-en-3-one, stigmasterol and
campesterol (1 mmol/l to 1 mmol/l), inhibited sodium- and potassium-adenosine
triphosphatase activity by 23–67% (47).
Effect on prostate growth
Intragastric administration of a hexane extract of the roots (1.28 g daily) to
castrated rats did not inhibit prostate growth stimulated by testosterone or
dihydrotestosterone (45). Intraperitoneal administration of a hydroalcoholic
extract of the roots (20 mg/kg body weight) suppressed testosterone-stimulated
increases in prostate weight and prostatic ornithine decarboxylase activity in
castrated rats (48). Daily oral administration of a hydroalcoholic extract of the
root to dogs with BPH (30 mg/kg body weight) decreased prostate volume by
30% after 100 days of treatment (49).
The effect of various root extracts was assessed after implantation of the
fetal urogenital sinus into the prostate gland of adult mice. Intragastric administration of a butanol, cyclohexane or ethyl acetate extract of the root (0.25
ml/daily for 3 weeks) had no effect on the development of BPH in mice.
However, intragastric administration of the same dose of a 20% methanol
extract of the root reduced the development of BPH by 51.4% (50).
Toxicology
The LD50 of an aqueous extract or infusion of the roots after intravenous administration to rats was 1721 mg/kg body weight and 1929 mg/kg body weight,
335

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
respectively. Oral administration of an infusion of the roots to rats was well
tolerated at doses up to 1310 mg/kg body weight (3).

Clinical pharmacology
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Placebo-controlled clinical trials
Three double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials have assessed the efficacy
of oral administration of Radix Urticae for the symptomatic treatment of lower
urinary tract disorders resulting from BPH (24, 27, 35). One study assessed the
efficacy of a 20% methanol extract of the roots in 50 men with BPH stages I
and II (35). A significant increase in urine volume (by 43.7%; P = 0.027) and a
significant decrease in serum levels of SHBG (P = 0.0005) was observed in
patients treated with 600 mg extract daily for 9 weeks. A modest increase
in maximum urinary flow of 8% was also observed in the treated group;
however, it was not significant (35). Another study assessed the efficacy of a
20% methanol extract in 40 men with BPH. Treatment with 1200 mg extract
daily for 6 weeks decreased the frequency of micturition and serum levels of
SHBG (27). The third study assessed the efficacy of a methanol extract in the
treatment of 32 men with BPH stage I (24). A 4–14% increase in average urinary
flow and a 40–53% decrease in postvoid residual volume were observed in
patients treated with 600 mg extract daily for 4–6 weeks (24).
Clinical trials without controls
Numerous clinical trials without controls have assessed the efficacy of oral
administration of various Radix Urticae extracts (20% methanol or 30–45%
ethanol) for the symptomatic treatment of lower urinary tract disorders (nocturia, polyuria, dysuria, urine retention) resulting from BPH (22, 23, 25, 26,
28–32, 34, 51, 52). One trial assessed the efficacy of a 40% ethanol extract of
the roots in 67 men with BPH. Treatment with 5 ml daily for 6 months
decreased nocturia and postvoid residual volume, but did not reduce prostate
enlargement (23). In another trial, a 20% methanol extract of the roots was
assessed in 89 men with BPH. Treatment with 600 mg daily decreased the postvoid residual volume in 75% of patients after 3–24 months (25). In a study of
26 men with BPH stage I or II, a decrease in prostate volume was observed in
54% of patients, and a decrease in postvoid residual volume was observed in
75% of patients, after treatment with 1200 mg methanol extract daily for 3–24
weeks (26). Ten men with BPH were treated with 30–150 drops of a 45%
ethanol extract of the root daily for 30 days. After treatment, the postvoid residual volume decreased by 66% (29). In a study of 39 men with BPH stages I–III,
an improvement in urinary flow, and a reduction in postvoid residual volume,
nocturia and polyuria were seen in 95% of patients after 6 months of treatment with a 20% methanol extract (600–1200 mg daily) (51). Twenty-seven
men with BPH stages I and II were treated with a 20% methanol extract of the
roots for 3.5 months. Postvoid residual volume decreased significantly in 75%
336

Radix Urticae
of patients (P < 0.001), and maximum urinary flow increased significantly in
50% of patients (P < 0.002) (52).
Three large-scale multicentre studies involving 14 033 men with BPH
assessed the efficacy of a 20% methanol extract (28, 31, 32). In one study, a
decrease in nocturia and polyuria was seen in 91% of patients after 6 months
of treatment (28). In another study, a 50% decrease in nocturia was observed
in patients treated with 1200 mg extract daily for 10 weeks (31). In the third
study, significant improvements in both urinary flow and postvoid residual
volume were observed in 4480 patients treated with 600–1200 mg extract daily
for 20 weeks (P < 0.01) (32).
Effects on prostate morphology
Three studies without controls examined the effect of various methanol
extracts of Radix Urticae on prostate morphology. Prostate cells were obtained
from patients with BPH by needle biopsy, and were analysed for morphological changes before and after treatment. In two of the studies, cells were taken
from the patients at various intervals during treatment (53, 54). In the third
study, cells were obtained once from the patients, and treatment with the
extract was carried out in vitro (55). In the first study, 31 men with BPH stages
I and II were treated orally with 1200 mg of a 20% methanol root extract daily
for 20 weeks. Prostate cells were analysed every 4 weeks by fluorescent
microscopy. After 4–16 weeks of treatment, an increase in nuclear volume, as
well as hydropic swelling and vacuolization of the cytoplasm, were observed
(53). In the second study, prostate cells from four men with BPH stage I were
examined by electron microscopy. After 6 months of oral treatment with
a 20% methanol extract (1200 mg daily), a reduction in the activity of smooth
muscle cells and an increase in the secretory activity of glandular epithelial cells
were observed (54). In the third study, prostate glandular epithelial cells from
33 patients with BPH were analysed by fluorescent microscopy following incubation of the cells in vitro with a 20% methanol extract of the root. Treatment with the extract caused an increase in nuclear volume, loosening of
chromatin and hydropic swelling of the cytoplasm. In addition, the number of
homogeneous secretory granules was reduced, indicating a reduction in the biological activity of these cells (55).

Contraindications
Radix Urticae is contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plants of the
Urticaceae family. Owing to its effects on androgen and estrogen metabolism,
the use of Radix Urticae during pregnancy and lactation and in children under
the age of 12 years is contraindicated.

Warnings
Radix Urticae relieves the symptoms associated with BPH but does not
have an effect on the size of the prostate. If symptoms worsen or do not
337

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
improve, or in cases of blood in the urine or acute urinary retention, contact a
physician.

Precautions
Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning drug
interactions; drug and laboratory test interactions; or carcinogenesis, mutagenesis and impairment of fertility.

Adverse reactions
Clinical studies have shown that extracts of Radix Urticae are well tolerated in
humans. A few cases of minor transient gastrointestinal side-effects, such as
diarrhoea, gastric pain and nausea (32, 35), and allergic skin reactions (32), have
been reported.

Dosage forms
Crude drug for infusion; hydroalcoholic extracts (4, 56). Store in a well-closed
container, protected from light and humidity (2, 13).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 4–6 g crude drug or equivalent preparations as an infusion (4, 56);
600–1200 mg dried 20% methanol extract (5 : 1) (22, 25, 27, 31, 32); 1.5–7.5 ml
45% ethanol extract (1 : 1) (29); 5 ml 40% ethanol extract (1 : 5) (17, 23).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. Deutsches Arzneibuch. Stuttgart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 1998.

338

Radix Urticae
3. Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Urtica dioica L. Fitoterapia, 1997, 68:387–402.
4. Blaschek W et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Folgeband 2:
Drogen A–K, 5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Patten G. Urtica. Australian Journal of Medical Herbalism, 1993, 5:5–13.
7. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
8. Grieve M. A modern herbal. Vol. II. New York, NY, Dover Publications, 1981.
9. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names in Latin, Arabic, Armenian,
English, French, German, Italian and Turkish languages. Cairo, Argus & Papazian Press,
1936.
10. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
11. Tutin TG et al., eds. Flora Europae. Vol. 4. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1976.
12. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
13. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Willer F, Wagner H, Schecklies E. Urtica root extract. Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung, 1991,
131:1211–1217.
16. Samtleben R, Boos G, Wagner H. Novel enzyme-linked immunoassay for the quantitation of Urtica dioica agglutinin (UDA) in stinging nettle extracts and human excretions. Phytomedicine, 1996, 2(Suppl. 1):134.
17. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 2. Elburg, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1996.
18. Gansser D, Spiteller G. Plant constituents interfering with human sex hormonebinding globulin. Evaluation of a test method and its application to Urtica dioica root
extracts. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, 1995, 50c:98–104.
19. Kraus R, Spiteller G, Bartsch W. (10E,12Z)-9-Hydroxy-10,12-octadecadiensäure, ein
Aromatase-Hemmstoff aus dem Wurzelextrakt von Urtica dioica. Liebigs Annelen der
Chemie, 1990, 12:1205–1214.
20. Schilcher H, Effenberger S. Scopoletin und b-Sitosterol—zwei geeignete Leitsubstanzen für Urticae radix. Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung, 1986, 126:79–81.
21. Wagner H et al. Lektine und Polysaccharide—die Wirkprinzipien der Urtica dioica
Wurzel. In: Boos G, ed. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie. Frankfurt, PMI, 1994.
22. Bauer HW et al. Endokrine Parameter während der Behandlung der benignen
Prostatahyperplasie mit ERU. In: Bauer HW, ed. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie II, klinische und experimentelle Urologie 19. Munich, Zuckschwerdt, 1988.
23. Belaiche P, Lievoux O. Clinical studies on the palliative treatment of prostatic
adenoma with extract of Urtica root. Phytotherapy Research, 1991, 5:267–269.
24. Dathe G, Schmid H. Phytotherapie der benignen Prostatahyperplasie (BPH). Doppelblindstudie mit Extraktum Radicis Urticae (ERU). Urologie [B], 1987, 27:223–226.
25. Djulepa J. Zweijährige Erfahrung in der Therapie des Prosta-Syndroms. Ärztliche
Praxis, 1982, 34:2199–2202.
26. Feiber H. Sonographische Verlaufsbeobachtungen zum Einfluss der medikamentösen Therapie der benignen Prostatahyperplasie (BPH). In: Bauer HW, ed. Benigne
Prostatahyperplasie II, klinische und experimentelle Urologie 19. Munich, Zuckschwerdt,
1988.
27. Fisher M, Wilbert D. Wirkprüfung eines Phytopharmakons zur Behandlung der
benignen Prostatahyperplasie (BPH). In: Rutishauser G, ed. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie III, klinische und experimentelle Urologie 22. Munich, Zuckschwerdt, 1992:79–83.

339

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
28. Friesen A. Statistische Analyse einer Multizenter-Langzeitstudie mit ERU. In: Bauer
HW, ed. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie II, klinische und experimentelle Urologie 19. Munich,
Zuckschwerdt, 1988:121–130.
29. Goetz P. Die Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie mit Brennesselwurzeln.
Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1989, 10:175–178.
30. Sonnenschein R. Untersuchung der Wirksamkeit eines prostatotropen Phytotherapeutikums (Urtica plus) bei benigner Prostatahyperplasie und Prostatitis—eine
prospektive multizentrische Studie. Urologie [B], 1987, 27:232–237.
31. Stahl HP. Die Therapie prostatischer Nykturie. Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Medizin, 1984,
60:128–132.
32. Tosch U et al. Medikamentöse Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie.
Euromed, 1983, 6:1–3.
33. Vahlensieck W. Konservative Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie. Therapiewoche Schweiz, 1986, 2:619–624.
34. Vandierendounck EJ, Burkhardt P. Extractum radicis urticae bei Fibromyoadenom
der Prostata mit nächtlicher Pollakisurie. Therapiewoche Schweiz, 1986, 2:892–895.
35. Vontobel HP et al. Ergebnisse einer Doppelblindstudie über die Wirksamkeit von
ERU-Kapseln in der konservativen Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie.
Urologie [A], 1985, 24:49–51.
36. Koch E. Pharmacology and modes of action of extracts of Palmetto fruits (Sabal
Fructus), stinging nettle roots (Urticae Radix) and pumpkin seed (Cucurbitae Peponis
Semen) in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N,
eds. Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung. Darmstadt, Verlag Dietrich Steinkopf, 1995:57–79.
37. Wagner H et al. Search for the antiprostatic principle of stinging nettle (Urtica dioica)
roots. Phytomedicine, 1994, 1:213–224.
38. Suh N et al. Discovery of natural product chemopreventive agents utilizing HL-60
cell differentiation as a model. Anticancer Research, 1995, 15:233–239.
39. Wagner H et al. Studies on the binding of Urtica dioica agglutinin (UDA) and other
lectins in an in vitro epidermal growth factor receptor test. Phytomedicine, 1995,
4:287–290.
40. Sinowatz F et al. Zur parakrinen Regulation des Prostatawachstums: Besteht eine
Wechselwirkung zwischen dem basalen Fibroblasten-Wachstumsfaktor und dem
Lektin UDA? In: Boos G, ed. Benigne Prostatathyperplasie. Frankfurt, PMI, 1994.
41. Schmidt K. The effect of an extract of Radix Urticae and various secondary extracts
on the SHBG of blood plasma in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Fortschritte der Medizin,
1983, 101:713–716.
42. Hryb DJ et al. The effects of extracts of the roots of the stinging nettle (Urtica dioica)
on the interaction of SHBG with its receptor on human prostatic membranes. Planta
Medica, 1995, 61:31–32.
43. Schöttner M, Gansser D, Spiteller G. Lignans from the roots of Urtica dioica and their
metabolites bind to human sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG). Planta Medica,
1997, 63:529–532.
44. Hartmann RW, Mark M, Soldati F. Inhibition of 5a-reductase and aromatase by PHL00801 (Prostatonin®), a combination of PY 102 (Pygeum africanum) and UR 102 (Urtica
dioica) extracts. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:121–128.
45. Rhodes L et al. Comparison of finasteride (Proscar®), a 5a-reductase inhibitor, and
various commercial plant extracts in in vitro and in vivo 5a-reductase inhibition.
Prostate, 1993, 22:43–51.
46. Gansser D, Spiteller G. Aromatase inhibitors from Urtica dioica roots. Planta Medica,
1995, 61:138–140.
47. Hirano T, Homma M, Oka K. Effects of stinging nettle root extracts and their
steroidal components on the Na+, K+-ATPase of the benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Planta Medica, 1994, 60:30–33.

340

Radix Urticae
48. Scapagnini U, Friesen A. Urtica dioica-Extrakt und Folgesubstanzen im Tierversuch.
Klinische und Experimentelle Urologie, 1992, 22:138–144.
49. Daube G. Pilotstudie zur Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie bei Hunden
mit Extractum Radicis Urticae (ERU). In: Bauer HW, ed. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie
II, klinische und experimentelle Urologie 19. Munich, Zuckschwerdt, 1988:63–66.
50. Lichius JJ, Muth C. The inhibiting effects of Urtica dioica root extracts on experimentally induced prostatic hyperplasia in the mouse. Planta Medica, 1997, 63:
307–310.
51. Maar K. Rückbildung der Symptomatik von Prostataadenomen. Fortschritte der
Medizin, 1987, 105:50–52.
52. Romics I. Observations with Bazotona® in the management of prostatic hyperplasia. International Urology and Nephrology, 1987, 19:293–297.
53. Ziegler H. Cytomorphological study of benign prostatic hyperplasia under treatment with extract. Radicis Urticae (ERU)—preliminary results. Fortschritte der
Medizin, 1982, 39:1823–1824.
54. Oberholzer M et al. Elektronenmikroskopische Ergebnisse bei medikamentös
behandelter benigner Prostatahyperplasie. In: Bauer HW, ed. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie. Munich, Zuckschwerdt, 1986.
55. Ziegler H. Investigations of prostate cells under the effect of extract Radix Urticae
(ERU) by fluorescent microscopy. Fortschritte der Medizin, 1983, 101:2112–2114.
56. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.

341

Folium Uvae Ursi

Definition
Folium Uvae Ursi consists of the dried leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.)
Spreng. (Ericaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Arbutus uva-ursi L., Arctostaphylos media Greene, Arctostaphylos officinalis Wimm.,
Arctostaphylos procumbens Patzke, Mairania uva-ursi Desv., Uva-ursi buxifolia S.F.
Gray, Uva-ursi procumbens Moench. (4).

Selected vernacular names
Achelblätter, Achelkraut, arberry, arctostaphylos, Bärenkraut, Bärentraube,
Bärentraubenblätter, bearberry, bear’s grape, Beredruif, berry leaves, brockberry, busserole, coralillo, crowberry, dogberry, enab edhdhib, feuille de busserole, feuille de raisin d’ours, folia artostaphyli, folia garjubae, folia uvae-ursi,
folia vaccinii ursi, foxberry, gayuba, herba garjubae, hog cranberry, hojas de
gayuba, kinnikinnick, leesikas, lisc maçznicy, mealyberry, medveszölölevel,
Moosbeerenblätter, mountain box, ptarmigan berry, raisin d’ours, red bearberry, sagochomi, Sandblätter, Steinbeerenblätter, upland cranberry, uva ursi,
uvaursina, uwaurushi, Wolfsbeerenblätter (4–6).

Geographical distribution
Found in North America, Asia and northern Europe (6).

Description
Procumbent evergreen shrub with trailing stems bearing short ascending
branches; branches bear leaves that are ovate, ovate-spatulate to spatulate.
Flowers bell-shaped, pinkish-white, hypogynous and borne in small clusters
at ends of branches; each flower consists of a calyx of 5 reddish sepals, a
reddish-white urceolate corolla, gamopetalous but divided at the margin into
5 short reflexed segments, 10 short stamens with 2-lobed anthers, and syncarpous pistil of 5 carpels. Style portion of the pistil simple, longer than the
stamens and ends in a knob-like stigma (6).
342

Folium Uvae Ursi

Plant material of interest: dried leaves
General appearance
Leaf entire or nearly entire; lamina obovate, oblong or spatulate, 7–30 mm long
and 5–13 mm wide, apex obtuse or rounded, margin entire or slightly revolute,
base cuneate, tapering to a short (about 5 mm long), slightly pubescent
petiole. Upper surface green to brownish-green, waxy, shiny and coriaceous,
finely wrinkled due to depression of midrib and veins. Lower surface greyishgreen, reticulate. Young leaves ciliate on the margins, old leaves glabrous
(1, 3, 6).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slightly aromatic, tea-like; taste: astringent, bitter (1, 6).

Microscopic characteristics
Both epidermises covered with a thick cuticle; cells of the upper epidermis rectangular with straight, slightly thickened and distinctly pitted and beaded walls;
cells of the lower epidermis similar but smaller; numerous large, anomocytic
stomata in lower epidermis only. Occasional unicellular, thick-walled, conical
trichomes on petiole and margin of young leaves; palisade usually of 3 layers,
occasionally more; some spongy mesophyll cells filled with orange-brown
pigment; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate in parenchymatous cells surrounding the narrow, lignified sclerenchymatous fibres associated with the
veins (1).

Powdered plant material
Greenish-grey or yellowish-green. Numerous cells of the mesophyll with
chloroplasts and frequently irregular masses of carbohydrate; fragments of
fibrovascular bundles showing spiral tracheae and narrow lignified sclerenchyma fibres associated with crystal fibres containing monoclinic prismatic
crystals of calcium oxalate up to 30 mm in length; epidermis with polygonal cells
and broadly elliptical anomocytic stomata up to 40 mm in length, surrounded
by 5–11 subsidiary cells; pericyclic fibres lignified, of irregular shape with thick,
porous, tuberculated walls and curved ends; trichomes unicellular, nonglandular, short, serpentine or straight; numerous fragments of cells containing
yellowish-brown resin which turns blueish-black with iron (III) chloride test
solution (3, 6).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, and thin-layer chromatography for
the presence of arbutin, hydroquinone and gallic acid (2, 3).
343

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for specific microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are as
described in the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal
plants (7).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 5% twigs and not more than 3% other foreign matter (2, 3).

Total ash
Not more than 5% (2, 3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1.5% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 25% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (3). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (3), and
the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for medicinal plants (7) and
pesticide residues (8).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO guidelines
on quality control methods for medicinal plants (7).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on quality control methods for
medicinal plants (7) for the analysis of radioactive isotopes.

Other purity tests
Chemical, sulfated ash and alcohol-soluble extractive tests to be established in
accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 7% hydroquinone derivatives calculated as anhydrous
arbutin, according to The Japanese pharmacopoeia (2). Contains not less than 8%
344

Folium Uvae Ursi
hydroquinone derivatives calculated as anhydrous arbutin, according to the
European pharmacopoeia (3). Quantitative analysis is performed by spectrophotometry at 455 nm (3) or by high-performance liquid chromatography
for the quantitative analysis of arbutin (2), hydroquinone and related
derivatives (9).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituent is arbutin (5–15%). Related hydroquinone derivatives
present include hydroquinone and methylarbutin (up to 4%). Gallic acid is the
major phenolic carboxylic acid present, together with galloyl arbutin and up to
20% of gallotannins, flavonoids and triterpenes, mainly ursolic acid and uvaol
(4, 10–12). The structures of the major constituents are presented below.

OH
HO

H
H3C

O O

H

CH3

H

R

OH
CH3
HO

arbutin

OH
OH
HO
hydroquinone

CO2H

HO
HO
OH

gallic acid

H
HO

CH3

H

CH3

H
H3C CH3

ursolic acid

R = CO2H

uvaol

R = CH2OH

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and in traditional systems
of medicine
Internally, as a mild urinary antiseptic for moderate inflammatory conditions
of the urinary tract and bladder, such as cystitis, urethritis and dysuria (11, 13,
14).

Uses described in folk medicine, not supported by experimental
or clinical data
As a diuretic, to stimulate uterine contractions, and to treat diabetes, poor eyesight, renal or urinary calculi, rheumatism and venereal disease (4, 5, 15).
Topical applications have been used for skin depigmentation (15).
345

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial activity
A 30% ethanol extract of Folium Uvae Ursi inhibited the growth in vitro of
Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella typhimurium,
Serratia marcescens and Staphylococcus aureus (16). However, 95% ethanol or
chloroform extracts had no antibacterial activity (17, 18). An aqueous extract
of the leaves inhibited the growth of Streptococcus mutans OMZ176 in vitro
(19). Ethanol and ethyl acetate extracts of the leaves were active in vitro
against Escherichia coli, Proteus vulgaris, Streptococcus faecalis and Enterobacter
aerogenes (20). Arbutin is responsible for most of the antibacterial activity
(21). Arbutin and hydroquinone inhibited the growth in vitro of Ureaplasma
urealyticum and Mycoplasma hominis (22). After ingestion of the leaves, arbutin
is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, and is hydrolysed by intestinal
flora to form the aglycone, hydroquinone (23). Hydroquinone is metabolized to glucuronate and sulfate esters that are excreted in the urine (24, 25).
These active hydroquinone derivatives exert an antiseptic and astringent
effect on the urinary mucous membranes when the urine is alkaline (pH 8.0).
Their antibacterial action reaches a maximum approximately 3–4 hours after
ingestion (13).
An aqueous extract of the leaves had antiviral activity in vitro against herpes
simplex virus type 2, influenza virus A2 (Mannheim 57) and vaccinia virus at
a concentration of 10% (26).
Anti-inflammatory activity
Intragastric administration of a 50% methanol extract of the leaves (100 mg/kg
body weight) to mice inhibited picryl chloride-induced ear inflammation (27).
The extract also potentiated the efficacy of prednisolone and dexamethasone
in mice (27, 28). Arbutin, however, had no effect on the activity of the two
steroids (28).
Effect on glucose levels
Administration of the leaves (6.35% of diet) to streptozocin-treated mice for
18 days did not reduce plasma glucose levels (29).
Effect on calcium excretion
Addition of an infusion of the leaves to the drinking-water (3 g/l) of rats fed
a standard diet fortified with calcium (8 g/kg body weight) had no effect on
urinary calcium excretion and diuresis (30).
Antitussive activity
Arbutin (50–100 mg/kg body weight, administered intraperitoneally or intragastrically) was as active as codeine (10 mg/kg body weight, administered
346

Folium Uvae Ursi
intraperitoneally) as an antitussive in unanaesthetized cats with coughs induced
by nylon fibres (31).
Effect on skin depigmentation
Extracts of the leaves have been widely used in cosmetic preparations to lighten
the skin, with the active principles being hydroquinone and its derivatives (15).
Toxicity and overdose
The oral LD50 of hydroquinone ranged from 300 to 1300 mg/kg body weight in
rodents and dogs, but was only 42–86 mg/kg body weight in cats. Acute exposure of rats to high doses of hydroquinone (over 1300 mg/kg body weight)
caused severe effects on the central nervous system, including hyperexcitability, tremor, convulsions, coma and death (32).

Clinical pharmacology
Antibacterial activity
In a study without controls, urine samples from healthy volunteers were collected 3 hours after oral administration of 0.1 or 1.0 g arbutin. The urine samples
(adjusted to pH 8.0) and 20 antibacterial compounds (at their usual urine concentration) were tested in vitro using 74 strains of bacteria, including Escherichia
coli, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Only
arbutin (present in urine samples collected after administration of 1.0 g arbutin),
gentamicin and nalidixic acid were active against all the strains tested (24). Oral
administration of 800 mg arbutin or an infusion of the leaves containing an
equivalent amount of arbutin to healthy volunteers had strong antibacterial
activity, as measured in urine samples after adjustment of the urine pH to 8.0
(25).

Contraindications
During pregnancy (33) or lactation, or in children under the age of 12 years (13).
Folium Uvae Ursi is also contraindicated in patients with kidney disorders (12).

Warnings
Folium Uvae Ursi should not be used for prolonged periods. Patients with persistent symptoms of a urinary tract infection should consult a physician. Use
of Folium Uvae Ursi may cause a greenish-brown coloration of the urine that
darkens on exposure to air due to the oxidation of hydroquinone.

Precautions
Drug interactions
Folium Uvae Ursi should not be administered with foods or medicines that
acidify the urine.
347

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Folium Uvae Ursi was not mutagenic in the Salmonella/microsome assay with
S. typhimurium strains TA98 or TA100 (34, 35). Hydroquinone was also not
mutagenic in the Salmonella/microsome assay with S. typhimurium strains TA98,
TA100, TA1535 or TA1537, with or without metabolic activation (36).
Although extracts of the leaves do not appear to be carcinogenic, there is
some evidence that hydroquinone is carcinogenic. Treatment of F344/N rats
with hydroquinone resulted in a marked increase in tubular cell adenomas
of the kidney in males, and an increase in mononuclear cell leukaemia in
females. There was also some evidence of carcinogenic activity of hydroquinone in female B6C3F1 mice, as shown by an increase in hepatocellular neoplasms, mainly adenomas. There was no evidence, however, of carcinogenic
activity of an aqueous extract of the leaves in male B6C3F1 mice (treated by
gavage with 50–100 mg extract/kg body weight) (36). The sources of human
exposure to hydroquinone (including environmental sources) have been
reviewed, as have data on its kinetics and metabolism, and its effects in animals
and humans (32).
Arbutin was administered subcutaneously at 25, 100 or 400 mg/kg body
weight daily to male rats before mating, and to female rats during pregnancy
and lactation. No effect on reproduction of male and female rats, or the development of the offspring was observed at doses of up to 100 mg/kg body weight.
Fetal toxicity was observed at doses of 400 mg/kg body weight (37).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information available on general precautions or precautions concerning
drug interactions; or drug and laboratory test interactions.

Adverse reactions
Internal use of Folium Uvae Ursi may cause nausea and vomiting due to
stomach irritation from the high tannin content (13, 38). The hydroquinone
concentration in topical preparations is limited to 2% in Nigeria, the United
348

Folium Uvae Ursi
Kingdom and the United States of America, following reports that preparations
containing more than 2% hydroquinone caused exogenous ochronosis in black
women in South Africa (39). Topical application of preparations containing less
than 3% hydroquinone in different bases caused negligible effects in male volunteers from different racial groups. However, there are case reports suggesting that skin-lightening creams containing 2% hydroquinone have produced
leukoderma as well as ochronosis. Hydroquinone (at a concentration of 1% in
aqueous solution or 5% in a cream) has caused erythema and allergic contact
dermatitis (32).

Dosage forms
Crude drug for infusions or cold macerates, extracts and solid forms for oral
administration (13). Store in a well-closed container, protected from light (3).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dose: 3 g crude drug in 150 ml water as an infusion or cold macerate, up
to three or four times daily; 400–850 mg hydroquinone derivatives. Other
preparations accordingly calculated as arbutin (12, 13).
Patients should avoid highly acidic foods, such as acidic fruits or fruit juice,
during treatment (25, 40), and be advised to drink plenty of fluids.

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. London, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1996.
2. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 13th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of Health and
Welfare, 1997.
3. European pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 1996.
4. Hänsel R et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Bd. 6: Drogen P–Z,
5th ed. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1994.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois at
Chicago, IL, February 9, 1998 production (an online database available directly
through the University of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientific and Technical Network [STN] of Chemical Abstracts Services).
6. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blakiston, 1950.
7. Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
8. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1997 (document WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
9. Sticher O, Soldati F, Lehmann D. High-performance liquid chromatographic separation and quantitative determination of arbutin, methylarbutin, hydroquinone and
hydroquinone monomethylether in Arctostaphylos, Bergenia, Calluna and Vaccinium
species. Planta Medica, 1979, 35:253–261.
10. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisier, 1995.
11. Bisset NG. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
12. ESCOP monographs on the medicinal uses of plant drugs. Fascicule 5. Devon, European
Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy, 1997.

349

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants
13. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs. Austin, TX,
American Botanical Council, 1998.
14. Stammwitz U. Pflanzliche Harnwegs-Desinfizienzien—heute noch aktuell. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1998, 19:90–95.
15. Scarpa A, Guerci A. Depigmenting procedures and drugs employed by melanoderm
populations. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1987, 19:17–36.
16. Leslie GB. A pharmacometric evaluation of nine bio-strath herbal remedies. Medita,
1978, 8:3–19.
17. Rios JL et al. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants employed in the Spanish
Mediterranean area. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1987, 21:139–152.
18. Gottshall RY et al. The occurrence of antibacterial substances active against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in seed plants. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 1949, 28:920–
923.
19. Namba T et al. Studies on dental caries prevention by traditional Chinese medicines. Part I. Screening of crude drugs for antibacterial action against Streptococcus
mutans. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1981, 35:295–302.
20. Holopainen M et al. Antimicrobial activity of some Finnish ericaceous plants. Acta
Pharmaceutica Fennica, 1988, 97:197–202.
21. Jahodár L et al. Antimikrobiálni pusobeni arbutinu a extraktu z listu medvèdice
lécive in vitro. Ceskoslovenska Farmacie, 1985, 34:174–178.
22. Robertson JA, Howard LA. Effect of carbohydrates on growth of Ureaplasma
urealyticum and Mycoplasma hominis. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 1987, 25:160–
161.
23. Paper DH et al. Bioavailability of drug preparations containing a leaf extract of
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Sprengl. (Uvae ursi folium). Pharmacy and Pharmacology
Letters, 1993, 3:66.
24. Kedzia B et al. Antibacterial action of urine containing arbutin metabolic products.
Medycyna Doswiadczalna I Mikrobiologia, 1975, 27:305–314.
25. Frohne D. Untersuchungen zur Frage der harndesinfizierenden Wirkungen von
Bärentraubenblatt-Extrakten. Planta Medica, 1970, 18:23–25.
26. May G, Willuhn G. Antiviral activity of aqueous extracts from medicinal plants in
tissue cultures. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1978, 28:1–7.
27. Kubo M et al. Pharmacological studies on leaf of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng.
I. Combined effect of 50% methanolic extract of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng
(bearberry leaf) and prednisolone on immuno-inflammation. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1990,
110:59–67.
28. Matsuda H et al. Pharmacological study on Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. II.
Combined effects of arbutin and prednisolone or dexamethasone on immunoinflammation. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1990, 110:68–76.
29. Swanson-Flatt SK et al. Evaluation of traditional plant treatments for diabetes:
studies in streptozotocin-diabetic mice. Acta Diabetologia, 1989, 26:51–55.
30. Grases F et al. Urolithiasis and phytotherapy. International Urology and Nephrology,
1994, 26:507–511.
31. Strapkova A et al. Antitussive effect of arbutin. Pharmazie, 1991, 46:611–612.
32. Hydroquinone. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1994 (WHO Environmental
Health Criteria, No. 157).
33. Expert Advisory Committee in Herbs and Botanical Preparations Report. Ottawa, Canadian Health Protection Branch, 1986.
34. Morimoto I et al. Mutagenicity screening of crude drugs with Bacillus subtilis
rec-assay and Salmonella/microsome reversion assay. Mutation Research, 1982, 97:81–
102.
35. Yamamoto H et al. Studies on the mutagenicity of crude drug extracts. I. Yakugaku
Zasshi, 1982, 102:596–601.

350

Folium Uvae Ursi
36. Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of hydroquinone (CAS No. 123-31-9) in F344/N
rats and B6C3F1 mice (gavage studies). Washington, DC, Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health, 1989 (National
Toxicology Program Technical Report Series, No. 366).
37. Itabashi M et al. Reproduction study in rats by subcutaneous administration.
Iyakuhin Kenkyu, 1988, 19:282–297.
38. Frohne D. Bärentraube. In Wichtl M, ed. Teedrogen, 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1989:72–74.
39. Williams H. Skin-lightening creams containing hydroquinone. The case for a temporary ban. British Medical Journal, 1992, 305:903–904.
40. Frohne D. Arctostaphylos uva-ursi: die Bärentraube. Zeitschrift der Phytotherapie, 1986,
7:45–47.

351

